<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>

    <title>cha20</title>
    <meta name="Adept.resource" value="urn:uuid:72553afb-4748-4b54-b285-6899574994e4"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link href="../stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>

  


<link href="../calibreHtmlOutBasicCss.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

</head>
<body>

<div class="calibreMeta">
  <div class="calibreMetaTitle">
  
  
    
    <h1>
      <a href="../../gpg61-vizkw.html">Flow
</a>
    </h1>
    
    
  
  </div>
  <div class="calibreMetaAuthor">
    Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi

  </div>
</div>

<div class="calibreMain">

  <div class="calibreEbookContent">
    
      <div class="calibreEbNavTop">
        
          <a href="ch05.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page</a>
        

        
          <a href="cha21.xhtml" class="calibreANext"> next page</a>
        
      </div>
    

    
<p class="chapterheada" id="cha20"><a href="con01.xhtml#cha_20" class="calibre2"><span class="bold">HIGHER, FASTER, STRONGER</span></a></p>

<p class="paranoindent">The Latin motto of the modern Olympic games—<span class="italic">Altius, citius, fortius</span>—is a good, if incomplete summary of how the body can experience flow. It encompasses the rationale of all sports, which is to do something better than it has ever been done before. The purest form of athletics, and sports in general, is to break through the limitations of what the body can accomplish.</p>

<p class="para">However unimportant an athletic goal may appear to the outsider, it becomes a serious affair when performed with the intent of demonstrating a perfection of skill. Throwing things, for instance, is a rather trivial ability; even small babies are quite good at it, as the toys surrounding any infant’s crib testify. But how far a person can throw an object of a certain weight becomes a matter of legend. The Greeks invented the discus, and the great discus throwers of antiquity were immortalized by the best sculptors; the Swiss gathered on holidays in mountain meadows to see who could toss the trunk of a tree farthest; the Scots did the same with gigantic rocks. In baseball nowadays pitchers become rich and famous because they can throw balls with speed and precision, and basketball players because they can sink them into hoops. Some athletes throw javelins; others are bowlers, shot-putters, or hammer throwers; some throw boomerangs or cast fishing lines. Each of these variations on the basic capacity to throw offers almost unlimited opportunities for enjoyment.</p>

<p class="para"><span class="italic">Altius</span>—higher—is the first word of the Olympic motto, and soaring above the ground is another universally recognized challenge. To break the bonds of gravity is one of the oldest dreams of mankind. The myth of Icarus, who had wings fashioned so he could reach the sun, has been long held to be a parable of the aims—noble and misguided at the <a id="page97" class="calibre2"></a>same time—of civilization itself. To jump higher, to climb the loftiest peaks, to fly far above the earth, are among the most enjoyable activities people can do. Yet some savants have recently invented a special psychic infirmity, the so-called “Icarus complex,” to account for this desire to be released from the pull of gravity. Like all explanations that try to reduce enjoyment to a defensive ploy against repressed anxieties, this one misses the point. Of course, in some sense all purposeful action can be regarded as a defense against the threats of chaos. But in that respect it is more worthwhile to consider acts that bring enjoyment as signs of health, not of disease.</p>

<p class="para">Flow experiences based on the use of physical skills do not occur only in the context of outstanding athletic feats. Olympians do not have an exclusive gift in finding enjoyment in pushing performance beyond existing boundaries. Every person, no matter how unfit he or she is, can rise a little higher, go a little faster, and grow to be a little stronger. The joy of surpassing the limits of the body is open to all.</p>

<p class="para">Even the simplest physical act becomes enjoyable when it is transformed so as to produce flow. The essential steps in this process are: (a) to set an overall goal, and as many subgoals as are realistically feasible; (b) to find ways of measuring progress in terms of the goals chosen; (c) to keep concentrating on what one is doing, and to keep making finer and finer distinctions in the challenges involved in the activity; (d) to develop the skills necessary to interact with the opportunities available; and (e) to keep raising the stakes if the activity becomes boring.</p>

<p class="para">A good example of this method is the act of walking, which is as simple a use of the body as one can imagine, yet which can become a complex flow activity, almost an art form. A great number of different goals might be set for a walk. For instance, the choice of the itinerary: where one wishes to go, and by what route. Within the overall route, one might select places to stop, or certain landmarks to see. Another goal may be to develop a personal style, a way to move the body easily and efficiently. An economy of motion that maximizes physical well-being is another obvious goal. For measuring progress, the feedback may include how fast and how easily the intended distance was covered; how many interesting sights one has seen; and how many new ideas or feelings were entertained along the way.</p>

<p class="para">The challenges of the activity are what force us to concentrate. The challenges of a walk will vary greatly, depending on the environment. For those who live in large cities, flat sidewalks and right-angle layouts make the physical act of walking easy. Walking on a mountain trail is another thing altogether: for a skilled hiker each step presents <a id="page98" class="calibre2"></a>a different challenge to be resolved with a choice of the most efficient foothold that will give the best leverage, simultaneously taking into account the momentum and the center of gravity of the body and the various surfaces—dirt, rocks, roots, grass, branches—on which the foot can land. On a difficult trail an experienced hiker walks with economy of motion and lightness, and the constant adjustment of her steps to the terrain reveals a highly sophisticated process of selecting the best solution to a changing series of complex equations involving mass, velocity, and friction. Of course these calculations are usually automatic, and give the impression of being entirely intuitive, almost instinctive; but if the walker does not process the right information about the terrain, and fails to make the appropriate adjustments in her gait, she will stumble or will soon grow tired. So while this kind of walking might be entirely unselfconscious, it is in fact a highly intense activity that requires concentrated attention.</p>

<p class="para">In the city the terrain itself is not challenging, but there are other opportunities for developing skills. The social stimulation of the crowds, the historical and architectural references of the urban milieu can add enormous variety to a walk. There are store windows to see, people to observe, patterns of human interaction to reflect on. Some walkers specialize in choosing the shortest routes, others the most interesting ones; some pride themselves in walking the same route with chronometric precision, others like to mix and match their itinerary. In winter some aim to walk as long as possible on the sunny stretches of the sidewalk, and to walk as much in the shade as possible in the summer. There are those who time their crossings exactly for when the traffic lights change to green. Of course these chances for enjoyment must be cultivated; they don’t just happen automatically to those who do not control their itinerary. Unless one sets goals and develops skills, walking is just featureless drudgery.</p>

<p class="para">Walking is the most trivial physical activity imaginable, yet it can be profoundly enjoyable if a person sets goals and takes control of the process. On the other hand, the hundreds of sophisticated forms of sport and body culture currently available—ranging from racquetball to Yoga, from bicycling to martial arts—may not be enjoyable at all if one approaches them with the attitude that one <span class="italic">must</span> take part in them because they are fashionable, or simply because they are good for one’s health. Many people get caught up in a treadmill of physical activity over which they end up having little control, feeling duty bound to exercise but not having any fun doing it. They have made the usual mistake of confounding form and substance, and assume that concrete actions and <a id="page99" class="calibre2"></a>events are the only “reality” that determines what they experience. For such individuals, joining a fancy health club should be almost a guarantee that they will enjoy themselves. However, enjoyment, as we have seen, does not depend on <span class="italic">what</span> you do, but rather on <span class="italic">how</span> you do it.</p>

<p class="para">In one of our studies we addressed the following question: Are people happier when they use more material resources in their leisure activities? Or are they happier when they invest more of themselves? We tried to answer these questions with the Experience Sampling Method (ESM), the procedure I developed at the University of Chicago to study the quality of experience. As described earlier, this method consists in giving people electronic pagers, or beepers, and a booklet of response sheets. A radio transmitter is programmed to send signals about eight times a day, at random intervals, for a week. Each time the pager signals, respondents fill out a page of the booklet, indicating where they are and what they are doing and with whom, and rating their state of mind on a variety of dimensions, such as a seven-point scale ranging from “very happy” to “very sad.”</p>

<p class="para">What we found was that when people were pursuing leisure activities that were expensive in terms of the outside resources required—activities that demanded expensive equipment, or electricity, or other forms of energy measured in BTUs, such as power boating, driving, or watching television—they were significantly <span class="italic">less</span> happy than when involved in inexpensive leisure. People were happiest when they were just talking to one another, when they gardened, knitted, or were involved in a hobby; all of these activities require few material resources, but they demand a relatively high investment of psychic energy. Leisure that uses up external resources, however, often requires less attention, and as a consequence it generally provides less memorable rewards.</p>




  </div>

  
  <div class="calibreToc">
    <h2><a href="../../gpg61-vizkw.html"> Table of contents</a></h2>
     <div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a href="text_cover.xhtml">Cover</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="text.xhtml">Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ded01.xhtml">Dedication</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="con01.xhtml">Contents</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="pre01.xhtml">Preface</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch01.xhtml">Chapter 1</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha01.xhtml">Introduction</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha02.xhtml">Overview</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha03.xhtml">The Roots of Discontent</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha04.xhtml">The Shields of Culture</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha05.xhtml">Reclaiming Experience</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha06.xhtml">Paths of Liberation</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha07.xhtml">The Limits of Consciousness</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha08.xhtml">Attention as Psychic Energy</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha09.xhtml">Enter the Self</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha10.xhtml">Disorder in Consciousness: Psychic Entropy</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha11.xhtml">Order in Consciousness: Flow</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha12.xhtml">Complexity and the Growth of the Self</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch03.xhtml">Chapter 3</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha13.xhtml">Pleasure and Enjoyment</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha14.xhtml">The Elements of Enjoyment</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha15.xhtml">The Autotelic Experience</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha16.xhtml">Flow Activities</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha17.xhtml">Flow and Culture</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha18.xhtml">The Autotelic Personality</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha19.xhtml">The People of Flow</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha20.xhtml">Higher, Faster, Stronger</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha21.xhtml">The Joys of Movement</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha22.xhtml">Sex as Flow</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha23.xhtml">The Ultimate Control: Yoga and the Martial Arts</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha24.xhtml">Flow through the Senses: The Joys of Seeing</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha25.xhtml">The Flow of Music</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha26.xhtml">The Joys of Tasting</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha27.xhtml">The Mother of Science</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha28.xhtml">The Rules of the Games of the Mind</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha29.xhtml">The Play of Words</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha30.xhtml">Befriending Clio</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha31.xhtml">The Delights of Science</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha32.xhtml">Loving Wisdom</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha33.xhtml">Amateurs and Professionals</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha34.xhtml">The Challenge of Lifelong Learning</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha35.xhtml">Autotelic Workers</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha36.xhtml">Autotelic Jobs</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha37.xhtml">The Paradox of Work</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha38.xhtml">The Waste of Free Time</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha39.xhtml">The Conflict between Being Alone and Being with Others</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha40.xhtml">The Pain of Loneliness</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha41.xhtml">Taming Solitude</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha42.xhtml">Flow and the Family</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha43.xhtml">Enjoying Friends</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha44.xhtml">The Wider Community</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha45.xhtml">Tragedies Transformed</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha46.xhtml">Coping with Stress</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha47.xhtml">The Power of Dissipative Structures</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha48.xhtml">The Autotelic Self: A Summary</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch10.xhtml">Chapter 10</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha49.xhtml">What Meaning Means</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha50.xhtml">Cultivating Purpose</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha51.xhtml">Forging Resolve</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha52.xhtml">Recovering Harmony</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha53.xhtml">The Unification of Meaning in Life Themes</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="not01.xhtml">Notes</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ref01.xhtml">References</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="cop01.xhtml">Copyright</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="atp01.xhtml">About the Publisher</a>
    </li>
  </ul>
</div>


  </div>
  

  <div class="calibreEbNav">
    
      <a href="ch05.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page</a>
    

    <a href="../../gpg61-vizkw.html" class="calibreAHome"> start</a>

    
      <a href="cha21.xhtml" class="calibreANext"> next page</a>
    
  </div>

</div>

</body>
</html>
