<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>

    <title>cha28</title>
    <meta name="Adept.resource" value="urn:uuid:72553afb-4748-4b54-b285-6899574994e4"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link href="../stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>

  


<link href="../calibreHtmlOutBasicCss.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

</head>
<body>

<div class="calibreMeta">
  <div class="calibreMetaTitle">
  
  
    
    <h1>
      <a href="../../gpg61-vizkw.html">Flow
</a>
    </h1>
    
    
  
  </div>
  <div class="calibreMetaAuthor">
    Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi

  </div>
</div>

<div class="calibreMain">

  <div class="calibreEbookContent">
    
      <div class="calibreEbNavTop">
        
          <a href="cha27.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page</a>
        

        
          <a href="cha29.xhtml" class="calibreANext"> next page</a>
        
      </div>
    

    
<p class="chapterheada" id="cha28"><a href="con01.xhtml#cha_28" class="calibre2"><span class="bold">THE RULES OF THE GAMES OF THE MIND</span></a></p>

<p class="paranoindent">Memory is not the only tool needed to give shape to what takes place in the mind. It is useless to remember facts unless they fit into patterns, unless one finds likenesses and regularities among them. The simplest ordering system is to give names to things; the words we invent trans<a id="page125" class="calibre2"></a>form discrete events into universal categories. The power of the word is immense. In Genesis 1, God names day, night, sky, earth, sea, and all the living things immediately after He creates them, thereby completing the process of creation. The Gospel of John begins with: “Before the World was created, the Word already existed…”; and Heraclitus starts his now almost completely lost volume: “This Word (<span class="italic">Logos</span>) is from everlasting, yet men understand it as little after the first hearing of it as before….” All these references suggest the importance of words in controlling experience. The building blocks of most symbol systems, words make abstract thinking possible and increase the mind’s capacity to store the stimuli it has attended to. Without systems for ordering information, even the clearest memory will find consciousness in a state of chaos.</p>

<p class="para">After names came numbers and concepts, and then the primary rules for combining them in predictable ways. By the sixth century <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> Pythagoras and his students had embarked on the immense ordering task that attempted to find common numerical laws binding together astronomy, geometry, music, and arithmetic. Not surprisingly, their work was difficult to distinguish from religion, since it tried to accomplish similar goals: to find a way of expressing the structure of the universe. Two thousand years later, Kepler and then Newton were still on the same quest.</p>

<p class="para">Theoretical thinking has never completely lost the imagistic, puzzlelike qualities of the earliest riddles. For example Archytas, the fourth-century-<span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> philosopher and commander-in-chief of the city-state of Tarentum (now in southern Italy), proved that the universe had no limits by asking himself: “Supposing that I came to the outer limits of the universe. If I now thrust out a stick, what would I find?” Archytas thought that the stick must have projected out into space. But in that case there was space beyond the limits of the universe, which meant that the universe had no bounds. If Archytas’s reasoning appears primitive, it is useful to recall that the intellectual experiments Einstein used to clarify to himself how relativity worked, concerning clocks seen from trains moving at different speeds, were not that different.</p>

<p class="para">Besides stories and riddles all civilizations gradually developed more systematic rules for combining information, in the form of geometric representations and formal proofs. With the help of such formulas it became possible to describe the movement of the stars, predict precisely seasonal cycles, and accurately map the earth. Abstract knowledge, and finally what we know as experimental science, grew out of these rules.<a id="page126" class="calibre2"></a></p>


<p class="para">It is important to stress here a fact that is all too often lost sight of: philosophy and science were invented and flourished because thinking is pleasurable. If thinkers did not enjoy the sense of order that the use of syllogisms and numbers creates in consciousness, it is very unlikely that now we would have the disciplines of mathematics and physics.</p>

<p class="para">This claim, however, flies in the face of most current theories of cultural development. Historians imbued with variants of the precepts of material determinism hold that thought is shaped by what people must do to make a living. The evolution of arithmetic and geometry, for instance, is explained almost exclusively in terms of the need for accurate astronomical knowledge and for the irrigational technology that was indispensable in maintaining the great “hydraulic civilizations” located along the course of large rivers like the Tigris, the Euphrates, the Indus, the Chang Jiang (Yangtze), and the Nile. For these historians, every creative step is interpreted as the product of extrinsic forces, whether they be wars, demographic pressures, territorial ambitions, market conditions, technological necessity, or the struggle for class supremacy.</p>

<p class="para">External forces are very important in determining which new ideas will be <span class="italic">selected</span> from among the many available; but they cannot explain their <span class="italic">production</span>. It is perfectly true, for instance, that the development and application of the knowledge of atomic energy were expedited enormously by the life-and-death struggle over the bomb between Germany on the one hand, and England and the United States on the other. But the science that formed the basis of nuclear fission owed very little to the war; it was made possible through knowledge laid down in more peaceful circumstances—for example, in the friendly exchange of ideas European physicists had over the years in the beer garden turned over to Niels Bohr and his scientific colleagues by a brewery in Copenhagen.</p>

<p class="para">Great thinkers have always been motivated by the enjoyment of thinking rather than by the material rewards that could be gained by it. Democritus, one of the most original minds of antiquity, was highly respected by his countrymen, the Abderites. However, they had no idea what Democritus was about. Watching him sit for days immersed in thought, they assumed he was acting unnaturally, and must be ill. So they sent for Hippocrates, the great doctor, to see what ailed their sage. After Hippocrates, who was not only a good medical man but also wise, discussed with Democritus the absurdities of life, he reassured the townspeople that their philosopher was, if anything, only too sane. He was not losing his mind; he was lost in the flow of thought.</p>

<p class="para">The surviving fragments of Democritus’s writing illustrate how <a id="page127" class="calibre2"></a>rewarding he found the practice of thinking to be: “It is godlike ever to think on something beautiful and on something new”; “Happiness does not reside in strength or money; it lies in rightness and many-sidedness”; “I would rather discover one true cause than gain the kingdom of Persia.” Not surprisingly, some of his more enlightened contemporaries concluded that Democritus had a cheerful disposition, and said that he “called Cheerfulness, and often Confidence, that is a mind devoid of fear, the highest good.” In other words, he enjoyed life because he had learned to control his consciousness.</p>

<p class="para">Democritus was neither the first nor the last thinker to be lost in the flow of the mind. Philosophers have frequently been regarded as being “absentminded,” which of course means not that their minds were lost, but that they had temporarily tuned out of everyday reality to dwell among the symbolic forms of their favorite domain of knowledge. When Kant supposedly placed his watch in a pot of boiling water while holding an egg in his hand to time its cooking, all his psychic energy was probably invested in bringing abstract thoughts into harmony, leaving no attention free to meet the incidental demands of the concrete world.</p>

<p class="para">The point is that playing with ideas is extremely exhilarating. Not only philosophy but the emergence of new scientific ideas is fueled by the enjoyment one obtains from creating a new way to describe reality. The tools that make the flow of thought possible are common property, and consist of the knowledge recorded in books available in schools and libraries. A person who becomes familiar with the conventions of poetry, or the rules of calculus, can subsequently grow independent of external stimulation. She can generate ordered trains of thought regardless of what is happening in external reality. When a person has learned a symbolic system well enough to use it, she has established a portable, self-contained world within the mind.</p>

<p class="para">Sometimes having control over such an internalized symbol system can save one’s life. It has been claimed, for instance, that the reason there are more poets per capita in Iceland than in any other country of the world is that reciting the sagas became a way for the Icelanders to keep their consciousness ordered in an environment exceedingly hostile to human existence. For centuries the Icelanders have not only preserved in memory but also added new verses to the epics chronicling the deeds of their ancestors. Isolated in the freezing night, they used to chant their poems huddled around fires in precarious huts, while outside the winds of the interminable arctic winters howled. If the Icelanders had spent all those nights in silence listening to the mocking wind, their <a id="page128" class="calibre2"></a>minds would have soon filled with dread and despair. By mastering the orderly cadence of meter and rhyme, and encasing the events of their own lives in verbal images, they succeeded instead in taking control of their experiences. In the face of chaotic snowstorms they created songs with form and meaning. To what extent did the sagas help the Icelanders endure? Would they have survived without them? There is no way to answer these questions with certainty. But who would dare to try the experiment?</p>

<p class="para">Similar conditions hold true when individuals are suddenly wrenched from civilization, and find themselves in those extreme situations we described earlier, such as concentration camps or polar expeditions. Whenever the outside world offers no mercy, an internal symbolic system can become a salvation. Anyone in possession of portable rules for the mind has a great advantage. In conditions of extreme deprivation poets, mathematicians, musicians, historians, and biblical experts have stood out as islands of sanity surrounded by the waves of chaos. To a certain extent, farmers who know the life of the fields or lumbermen who understand the forest have a similar support system, but because their knowledge is less abstractly coded, they have more need to interact with the actual environment to be in control.</p>

<p class="para">Let us hope none of us will be forced to call upon symbolic skills to survive concentration camps or arctic ordeals. But having a portable set of rules that the mind can work with is of great benefit even in normal life. People without an internalized symbolic system can all too easily become captives of the media. They are easily manipulated by demagogues, pacified by entertainers, and exploited by anyone who has something to sell. If we have become dependent on television, on drugs, and on facile calls to political or religious salvation, it is because we have so little to fall back on, so few internal rules to keep our mind from being taken over by those who claim to have the answers. Without the capacity to provide its own information, the mind drifts into randomness. It is within each person’s power to decide whether its order will be restored from the outside, in ways over which we have no control, or whether the order will be the result of an internal pattern that grows organically from our skills and knowledge.</p>




  </div>

  
  <div class="calibreToc">
    <h2><a href="../../gpg61-vizkw.html"> Table of contents</a></h2>
     <div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a href="text_cover.xhtml">Cover</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="text.xhtml">Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ded01.xhtml">Dedication</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="con01.xhtml">Contents</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="pre01.xhtml">Preface</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch01.xhtml">Chapter 1</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha01.xhtml">Introduction</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha02.xhtml">Overview</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha03.xhtml">The Roots of Discontent</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha04.xhtml">The Shields of Culture</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha05.xhtml">Reclaiming Experience</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha06.xhtml">Paths of Liberation</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha07.xhtml">The Limits of Consciousness</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha08.xhtml">Attention as Psychic Energy</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha09.xhtml">Enter the Self</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha10.xhtml">Disorder in Consciousness: Psychic Entropy</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha11.xhtml">Order in Consciousness: Flow</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha12.xhtml">Complexity and the Growth of the Self</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch03.xhtml">Chapter 3</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha13.xhtml">Pleasure and Enjoyment</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha14.xhtml">The Elements of Enjoyment</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha15.xhtml">The Autotelic Experience</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha16.xhtml">Flow Activities</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha17.xhtml">Flow and Culture</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha18.xhtml">The Autotelic Personality</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha19.xhtml">The People of Flow</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha20.xhtml">Higher, Faster, Stronger</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha21.xhtml">The Joys of Movement</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha22.xhtml">Sex as Flow</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha23.xhtml">The Ultimate Control: Yoga and the Martial Arts</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha24.xhtml">Flow through the Senses: The Joys of Seeing</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha25.xhtml">The Flow of Music</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha26.xhtml">The Joys of Tasting</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha27.xhtml">The Mother of Science</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha28.xhtml">The Rules of the Games of the Mind</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha29.xhtml">The Play of Words</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha30.xhtml">Befriending Clio</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha31.xhtml">The Delights of Science</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha32.xhtml">Loving Wisdom</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha33.xhtml">Amateurs and Professionals</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha34.xhtml">The Challenge of Lifelong Learning</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha35.xhtml">Autotelic Workers</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha36.xhtml">Autotelic Jobs</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha37.xhtml">The Paradox of Work</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha38.xhtml">The Waste of Free Time</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha39.xhtml">The Conflict between Being Alone and Being with Others</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha40.xhtml">The Pain of Loneliness</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha41.xhtml">Taming Solitude</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha42.xhtml">Flow and the Family</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha43.xhtml">Enjoying Friends</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha44.xhtml">The Wider Community</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha45.xhtml">Tragedies Transformed</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha46.xhtml">Coping with Stress</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha47.xhtml">The Power of Dissipative Structures</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha48.xhtml">The Autotelic Self: A Summary</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch10.xhtml">Chapter 10</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha49.xhtml">What Meaning Means</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha50.xhtml">Cultivating Purpose</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha51.xhtml">Forging Resolve</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha52.xhtml">Recovering Harmony</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha53.xhtml">The Unification of Meaning in Life Themes</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="not01.xhtml">Notes</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ref01.xhtml">References</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="cop01.xhtml">Copyright</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="atp01.xhtml">About the Publisher</a>
    </li>
  </ul>
</div>


  </div>
  

  <div class="calibreEbNav">
    
      <a href="cha27.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page</a>
    

    <a href="../../gpg61-vizkw.html" class="calibreAHome"> start</a>

    
      <a href="cha29.xhtml" class="calibreANext"> next page</a>
    
  </div>

</div>

</body>
</html>
