<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>

    <title>cha36</title>
    <meta name="Adept.resource" value="urn:uuid:72553afb-4748-4b54-b285-6899574994e4"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link href="../stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>

  


<link href="../calibreHtmlOutBasicCss.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

</head>
<body>

<div class="calibreMeta">
  <div class="calibreMetaTitle">
  
  
    
    <h1>
      <a href="../../gpg61-vizkw.html">Flow
</a>
    </h1>
    
    
  
  </div>
  <div class="calibreMetaAuthor">
    Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi

  </div>
</div>

<div class="calibreMain">

  <div class="calibreEbookContent">
    
      <div class="calibreEbNavTop">
        
          <a href="cha35.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page</a>
        

        
          <a href="cha37.xhtml" class="calibreANext"> next page</a>
        
      </div>
    

    
<p class="chapterheada" id="cha36"><a href="con01.xhtml#cha_36" class="calibre2"><span class="bold">AUTOTELIC JOBS</span></a></p>

<p class="paranoindent">Serafina, Joe, and Ting are examples of people who have developed an autotelic personality. Despite the severe limitations of their environment they were able to change constraints into opportunities for expressing their freedom and creativity. Their method represents one way to enjoy one’s job while making it richer. The other is to change the job itself, until its conditions are more conducive to flow, even for people who lack autotelic personalities. The more a job inherently resembles a game—with variety, appropriate and flexible challenges, clear goals, and immediate feedback—the more enjoyable it will be regardless of the worker’s level of development.</p>

<p class="para">Hunting, for instance, is a good example of “work” that by its very nature had all the characteristics of flow. For hundreds of thousands of years chasing down game was the main productive activity in which humans were involved. Yet hunting has proven to be so enjoyable that many people are still doing it as a hobby, after all practical need for it has disappeared. The same is true of fishing. The pastoral mode of existence also has some of the freedom and flowlike structure of earliest “work.” Many contemporary young Navajos in Arizona claim that following their sheep on horseback over the mesas is the most enjoyable thing they ever do. Compared to hunting or herding, farming is more difficult to enjoy. It is a more settled, more repetitive activity, and the results take much longer to appear. The seeds planted in spring need months to bear fruit. To enjoy agriculture one must play within a much longer time frame than in hunting: while the hunter may choose his quarry and method of attack several times each day, the farmer decides what crops to plant, where, and in what quantity only a few times each year. In order to succeed, the farmer must make lengthy preparations, and endure chancy periods of waiting helplessly for the weather to cooperate. It is not surprising to learn that populations of nomads or hunters, when forced to become farmers, appear to have died out rather than submitting themselves to that ostensibly boring existence. Yet many farmers also eventually learned to enjoy the more subtle opportunities of their occupation.</p>

<p class="para">The crafts and cottage industries that before the eighteenth century occupied most of the time left free from farming were reasonably <a id="page153" class="calibre2"></a>well designed in terms of providing flow. English weavers, for example, had their looms at home, and worked with their entire family according to self-imposed schedules. They set their own goals for production, and modified them according to what they thought they could accomplish. If the weather was good, they quit so they could work in the orchard or the vegetable garden. When they felt like it they would sing a few ballads, and when a piece of cloth was finished they all celebrated with a wee drink.</p>

<p class="para">This arrangement still functions in some parts of the world that have been able to maintain a more humane pace of production, despite all the benefits of modernization. For instance, Professor Massimini and his team have interviewed weavers in the province of Biella, in northern Italy, whose pattern of working resembles that of the fabled English weavers of over two centuries ago. Each of these families owns two to ten mechanical looms that can be supervised by a single person. The father may watch the looms early in the morning, then call in his son to take over while he goes looking for mushrooms in the forest or stops by the creek to fish for trout. The son runs the machines until he gets bored, at which point the mother takes over.</p>

<p class="para">In their interviews, every member of the families listed weaving as the most enjoyable activity they did—more than traveling, more than going to discos, more than fishing, and certainly more than watching TV. The reason that working was so much fun is that it was continually challenging. Family members designed their own patterns, and when they had had enough of one kind they would switch to another. Each family decided what type of cloth to weave, where to buy the materials, how much to produce, and where to sell it. Some families had customers as far away as Japan and Australia. Family members were always traveling to manufacturing centers to keep abreast of new technical developments, or to buy necessary equipment as cheaply as possible.</p>

<p class="para">But throughout most of the Western world such cozy arrangements conducive to flow were brutally disrupted by the invention of the first power looms, and the centralized factory system they spawned. By the middle of the eighteenth century family crafts in England were generally unable to compete with mass production. Families were broken up, workers had to leave their cottages and move en masse into ugly and unwholesome plants, rigid schedules lasting from dawn to dusk were enforced. Children as young as seven years of age had to work themselves to exhaustion among indifferent or exploitive strangers. If the enjoyment of work had any credibility before, it was effectively destroyed in that first frenzy of industrialization.<a id="page154" class="calibre2"></a></p>


<p class="para">Now we have entered a new, postindustrial age, and work is said to be becoming benign again: the typical laborer now sits in front of a bank of dials, supervising a computer screen in a pleasant control room, while a band of savvy robots down the line do whatever “real” work needs to be done. In fact, most people are not engaged in production any longer; they work in the so-called “service sector,” at jobs that would surely appear like pampered leisure to the farmers and factory workers of only a few generations ago. Above them are the managers and professionals, who have great leeway in making whatever they want to of their jobs.</p>

<p class="para">So work can be either brutal and boring, or enjoyable and exciting. In just a few decades, as happened in England in the 1740s, the average working conditions can change from being relatively pleasant to a nightmare. Technological innovations such as the waterwheel, the plow, the steam engine, electricity, or the silicon chip can make a tremendous difference in whether work will be enjoyable or not. Laws regulating the enclosure of the commons, the abolition of slavery, the abolition of apprentices, or the institution of the forty-hour week and of minimum wages can also have a great impact. The sooner we realize that the quality of the work experience can be transformed at will, the sooner we can improve this enormously important dimension of life. Yet most people still believe that work is forever destined to remain “the curse of Adam.”</p>

<p class="para">In theory, any job could be changed so as to make it more enjoyable by following the prescriptions of the flow model. At present, however, whether work is enjoyable or not ranks quite low among the concerns of those who have the power to influence the nature of a given job. Management has to care for productivity first and foremost, and union bosses have to keep safety, security, and compensations uppermost in their minds. In the short run these priorities might well conflict with flow-producing conditions. This is regrettable, because if workers really enjoyed their jobs they would not only benefit personally, but sooner or later they would almost certainly produce more efficiently and reach all the other goals that now take precedence.</p>

<p class="para">At the same time, it would be erroneous to expect that if all jobs were constructed like games, everyone would enjoy them. Even the most favorable external conditions do not guarantee that a person will be in flow. Because optimal experience depends on a subjective evaluation of what the possibilities for action are, and of one’s own capacities, it happens quite often that an individual will be discontented even with a potentially great job.<a id="page155" class="calibre2"></a></p>


<p class="para">Let us take as an example the profession of surgery. Few jobs involve so much responsibility, or bestow so much status on its practitioners. Certainly if challenges and skills are significant factors, then surgeons must find their job exhilarating. And in fact many surgeons say that they are addicted to their work, that nothing else in their lives compares with it in terms of enjoyment, that anything that takes them away from the hospital—a Caribbean vacation, a night at the opera—feels like a waste of time.</p>

<p class="para">But not every surgeon is as enthusiastic about his job. Some grow so bored by it that they take up drinking, gambling, or a fast life-style to forget its drudgery. How can such widely diverging views of the same profession be possible? One reason is that surgeons who settle down for well-paid but repetitive routines soon begin to feel their tedium. There are surgeons who only cut out appendices, or tonsils; a few even specialize in piercing earlobes. Such specialization can be lucrative, but it makes enjoying the job more difficult. At the other extreme, there are competitive supersurgeons who go off the deep end in the other direction, constantly needing new challenges, wanting to perform spectacular new surgical procedures until they finally can’t meet the expectations they have set for themselves. Surgical pioneers burn out for the opposite reason of the routine specialist: they have accomplished the impossible once, but they haven’t found a way to do it again.</p>

<p class="para">Those surgeons who enjoy their work usually practice in hospitals that allow variety and a certain amount of experimentation with the latest techniques, and that make research and teaching part of the job. The surgeons who like what they do mention money, prestige, and saving lives as being important to them, but they state that their greatest enthusiasm is for the intrinsic aspects of the job. What makes surgery so special for them is the feeling one gets from the activity itself. And the way they describe that feeling is in almost every detail similar to the flow experiences reported by athletes, artists, or the cook who butchered the meat for the Lord of Wei.</p>

<p class="para">The explanation for this is that surgical operations have all the characteristics that a flow activity should have. Surgeons mention, for instance, how well defined their goals are. An internist deals with problems that are less specific and localized, and a psychiatrist with even more vague and ephemeral symptoms and solutions. By contrast the surgeon’s task is crystal-clear: to cut out the tumor, or set the bone, or get some organ pumping away again. Once that task is accomplished he can sew up the incision, and turn to the next patient with the sense of a job well done.<a id="page156" class="calibre2"></a></p>


<p class="para">Similarly surgery provides immediate and continuous feedback. If there is no blood in the cavity, the operation is going well; then the diseased tissue comes out, or the bone is set; the stitches take (or not, if that is the case), but throughout the process one knows exactly how successful one is, and if not, why not. For this reason alone, most surgeons believe that what they are doing is so much more enjoyable than any other branch of medicine, or any other job on earth.</p>

<p class="para">At another level, there is no lack of challenges in surgery. In the words of one surgeon: “I get intellectual enjoyment—like the chess player or the academic who studies ancient Mesopotamian toothpicks…. The craft is enjoyable, like carpentry is fun…. The gratification of taking an extremely difficult problem and making it go.” And another: “It’s very satisfying and if it is somewhat difficult it is also exciting. It’s very nice to make things work again, to put things in their right place so that it looks like it should, and fits neatly. This is very pleasant, particularly when the group works together in a smooth and efficient manner: then the aesthetics of the whole situation can be appreciated.”</p>

<p class="para">This second quote indicates that the challenges of an operation are not limited to what the surgeon must do personally, but include coordinating an event that involves a number of additional players. Many surgeons comment on how exhilarating it is to be part of a well-trained team that functions smoothly and efficiently. And of course there is always the possibility of doing things better, of improving one’s skills. An eye surgeon commented, “You use fine and precise instruments. It is an exercise in art…. It all rests on how precisely and artistically you do the operation.” Remarked another surgeon, “It is important to watch for details, to be neat and technically efficient. I don’t like to waste motion and so try to make the operation as well planned and thought out as possible. I’m particular about how the needle is held, where the stitches are placed, the type of suture, and so on—things should look the best and seem easy.”</p>

<p class="para">The way surgery is practiced helps block out distractions, and concentrates all one’s attention on the procedure. The operating theater is indeed like a stage, with spotlights illuminating the action and the actors. Before an operation surgeons go through steps of preparation, purification, and dressing up in special garments—like athletes before a contest, or priests before a ceremony. These rituals have a practical purpose, but they also serve to separate celebrants from the concerns of everyday life, and focus their minds on the event to be enacted. Some surgeons say that on the mornings before an important operation they put themselves on “automatic pilot” by eating the same breakfast, wear<a id="page157" class="calibre2"></a>ing the same clothes, and driving to the hospital by the same route. They do so not because they are superstitious, but because they sense that this habitual behavior makes it easier for them to devote their undivided attention to the challenge ahead.</p>

<p class="para">Surgeons are lucky. Not only are they paid well, not only do they bask in respect and admiration, but they also have a job built according to the blueprint of flow activities. Notwithstanding all these advantages, there are surgeons who go out of their minds because of boredom, or because they are reaching after unattainable power and fame. What this indicates is that important as the structure of a job is, by itself it won’t determine whether or not a person performing that job will find enjoyment in it. Satisfaction in a job will also depend on whether or not a worker has an autotelic personality. Joe the welder enjoyed tasks that few would regard as providing opportunities for flow. At the same time some surgeons manage to hate a job that seems to have been intentionally created to provide enjoyment.</p>

<p class="para">To improve the quality of life through work, two complementary strategies are necessary. On the one hand jobs should be redesigned so that they resemble as closely as possible flow activities—as do hunting, cottage weaving, and surgery. But it will also be necessary to help people develop autotelic personalities like those of Serafina, Joe, and Ting, by training them to recognize opportunities for action, to hone their skills, to set reachable goals. Neither one of these strategies is likely to make work much more enjoyable by itself; in combination, they should contribute enormously to optimal experience.</p>




  </div>

  
  <div class="calibreToc">
    <h2><a href="../../gpg61-vizkw.html"> Table of contents</a></h2>
     <div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a href="text_cover.xhtml">Cover</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="text.xhtml">Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ded01.xhtml">Dedication</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="con01.xhtml">Contents</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="pre01.xhtml">Preface</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch01.xhtml">Chapter 1</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha01.xhtml">Introduction</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha02.xhtml">Overview</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha03.xhtml">The Roots of Discontent</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha04.xhtml">The Shields of Culture</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha05.xhtml">Reclaiming Experience</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha06.xhtml">Paths of Liberation</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha07.xhtml">The Limits of Consciousness</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha08.xhtml">Attention as Psychic Energy</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha09.xhtml">Enter the Self</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha10.xhtml">Disorder in Consciousness: Psychic Entropy</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha11.xhtml">Order in Consciousness: Flow</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha12.xhtml">Complexity and the Growth of the Self</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch03.xhtml">Chapter 3</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha13.xhtml">Pleasure and Enjoyment</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha14.xhtml">The Elements of Enjoyment</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha15.xhtml">The Autotelic Experience</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha16.xhtml">Flow Activities</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha17.xhtml">Flow and Culture</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha18.xhtml">The Autotelic Personality</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha19.xhtml">The People of Flow</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha20.xhtml">Higher, Faster, Stronger</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha21.xhtml">The Joys of Movement</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha22.xhtml">Sex as Flow</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha23.xhtml">The Ultimate Control: Yoga and the Martial Arts</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha24.xhtml">Flow through the Senses: The Joys of Seeing</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha25.xhtml">The Flow of Music</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha26.xhtml">The Joys of Tasting</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha27.xhtml">The Mother of Science</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha28.xhtml">The Rules of the Games of the Mind</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha29.xhtml">The Play of Words</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha30.xhtml">Befriending Clio</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha31.xhtml">The Delights of Science</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha32.xhtml">Loving Wisdom</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha33.xhtml">Amateurs and Professionals</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha34.xhtml">The Challenge of Lifelong Learning</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha35.xhtml">Autotelic Workers</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha36.xhtml">Autotelic Jobs</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha37.xhtml">The Paradox of Work</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha38.xhtml">The Waste of Free Time</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha39.xhtml">The Conflict between Being Alone and Being with Others</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha40.xhtml">The Pain of Loneliness</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha41.xhtml">Taming Solitude</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha42.xhtml">Flow and the Family</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha43.xhtml">Enjoying Friends</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha44.xhtml">The Wider Community</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha45.xhtml">Tragedies Transformed</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha46.xhtml">Coping with Stress</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha47.xhtml">The Power of Dissipative Structures</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha48.xhtml">The Autotelic Self: A Summary</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch10.xhtml">Chapter 10</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha49.xhtml">What Meaning Means</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha50.xhtml">Cultivating Purpose</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha51.xhtml">Forging Resolve</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha52.xhtml">Recovering Harmony</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha53.xhtml">The Unification of Meaning in Life Themes</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="not01.xhtml">Notes</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ref01.xhtml">References</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="cop01.xhtml">Copyright</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="atp01.xhtml">About the Publisher</a>
    </li>
  </ul>
</div>


  </div>
  

  <div class="calibreEbNav">
    
      <a href="cha35.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page</a>
    

    <a href="../../gpg61-vizkw.html" class="calibreAHome"> start</a>

    
      <a href="cha37.xhtml" class="calibreANext"> next page</a>
    
  </div>

</div>

</body>
</html>
