<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>

    <title>ref01</title>
    <meta name="Adept.resource" value="urn:uuid:72553afb-4748-4b54-b285-6899574994e4"/>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8"/>
  <link href="../stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="../page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>

  


<link href="../calibreHtmlOutBasicCss.css" type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" />

</head>
<body>

<div class="calibreMeta">
  <div class="calibreMetaTitle">
  
  
    
    <h1>
      <a href="../../gpg61-vizkw.html">Flow
</a>
    </h1>
    
    
  
  </div>
  <div class="calibreMetaAuthor">
    Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi

  </div>
</div>

<div class="calibreMain">

  <div class="calibreEbookContent">
    
      <div class="calibreEbNavTop">
        
          <a href="not01.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page</a>
        

        
          <a href="cop01.xhtml" class="calibreANext"> next page</a>
        
      </div>
    

    
<div class="titlepage" id="ref01">
<a id="page281" class="calibre2"></a>

<div class="calibre3">

<h2 class="chaptertitle"><span class="xrefinternal"><a href="con01.xhtml#ref_01" class="calibre4"><span class="bold1">REFERENCES</span></a></span></h2>
</div>

<div class="calibre3">

<p class="bibliographyentry">Ach, N. 1905. <span class="italic">Über die Willenstätigkeit und das Denkens</span>. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &amp; Ruprecht.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Adler, A. 1956. <span class="italic">The individual psychology of Alfred Adler</span>. New York: Basic Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Adler, M. J. 1956. Why only adults can be educated. In <span class="italic">Great issues in education</span>. Chicago: Great Books Foundation.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Ainsworth, M. D. S., Bell, S. M., &amp; Stayton, D. J. 1971. Individual differences in strange-situation behavior of one-year-olds. In H. R. Schaffer, ed., <span class="italic">The origins of human social relations</span>. London: Academic Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Ainsworth, M., Blehar, M., Waters, E., &amp; Wall, S. 1978. <span class="italic">Patterns of attachment</span>. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Alexander, R. D. 1974. The evolution of social behavior. <span class="italic">Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics</span> 5:325–83.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1979. Evolution and culture. In N. A. Chagnon &amp; W. Irons, eds., <span class="italic">Evolutionary biology and human social behavior: An anthropological perspective</span> (pp. 59–78). North Scituate, Mass.: Duxbury Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1987. <span class="italic">The biology of moral systems</span>. New York: Aldine de Guyter.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Allison, M. T., &amp; Duncan, M. C. 1988. Women, work, and flow. In M. Csikszentmihalyi &amp; I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds., <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Studies of flow in consciousness</span> (pp. 118–37). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Allport, G. W. 1955. <span class="italic">Becoming: Basic considerations for a psychology of personality</span>. New Haven: Yale University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Altmann, J. 1980. <span class="italic">Baboon mothers and infants</span>. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Altmann, S. A., &amp; Altmann, J. 1970. <span class="italic">Baboon ecology: African field research</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Alvarez, A. 1973. <span class="italic">The savage god</span>. New York: Bantam.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Amabile, T. M. 1983. <span class="italic">The social psychology of creativity</span>. New York: Springer Verlag.</p>
<a id="page282" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Andreasen, N. C. 1987. Creativity and mental illness: Prevalence rates in writers and their first-degree relatives. <span class="italic">American Journal of Psychiatry</span> 144(10): 1288–92.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Andrews, F. M., &amp; Withey, S. B. 1976. <span class="italic">Social indicators of well-being</span>. New York: Plenum.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Angyal, A. 1941. <span class="italic">Foundations for a science of personality</span>. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1965. <span class="italic">Neurosis and treatment: A holistic theory</span>. New York: Wiley.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Aquinas, T. (1985). <span class="italic">Summa theologica. Aquinas’ Summa: An introduction and interpretation</span> (by E. J. Gratsch). New York: Alba House.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Archimedes Foundation. 1988. <span class="italic">Directory of human happiness and well-being</span>. Toronto.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Arendt, H. 1958. <span class="italic">The human condition</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1963. <span class="italic">Eichmann in Jerusalem</span>. New York: Viking Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Argyle, M. 1987. <span class="italic">The psychology of happiness</span>. London: Methuen.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Aries, P., &amp; Duby, G., gen. eds. 1987. <span class="italic">A history of private life</span>. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Aristotle. (1980). <span class="italic">Nicomachean Ethics</span>. Book 1; book 3, chapter 11; book 7; book 7, chapter 11; book 9, chapters 9, 10. In <span class="italic">Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics</span>, commentary and analysis by F. H. Eterovich. Washington, D. C.: University Press of America.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Arnheim, R. 1954. <span class="italic">Art and visual perception: A psychology of the creative eye</span>. Berkeley: University of California Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1971. <span class="italic">Entropy and art</span>. Berkeley: University of California Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1982. <span class="italic">The power of the center</span>. Berkeley: University of California Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Arnold, E. V. 1911 (1971). <span class="italic">Roman Stoicism</span>. New York: Books for Libraries Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Atkinson, R. C., &amp; Shiffrin, R. M. 1968. Human memory: A proposed system and its control processes. In K. Spence &amp; J. Spence, eds., <span class="italic">The psychology of learning and motivation</span>, vol. 2. New York: Academic Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Baldridge, L. 1987. <span class="italic">Letitia Baldridge’s complete guide to a great social life</span>. New York: Rawson Assocs.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bandura, A. 1982. Self-efficacy mechanisms in human agency. <span class="italic">American Psychologist</span> 37:122–47.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bateson, G. 1978. The birth of a double bind. In M. Berger, ed., <span class="italic">Beyond the double bind</span> (p. 53). New York: Brunner/Mazel.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Baumgarten, A. 1735 (1936). Reflections on poetry. In B. Croce, ed., <span class="italic">Aesthetica</span>. Bari: Laterza.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Baumrind, D. 1977. Socialization determinants of personal agency. Paper presented at biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development, New Orleans.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Beattie, O., &amp; Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1981. On the socialization influence of books. <span class="italic">Child Psychology and Human Development</span> 11(1):3–18.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Beck, A. T. 1976. <span class="italic">Cognitive therapy and emotional disorders</span>. New York: International Universities Press.</p>
<a id="page283" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bee, H. L. 1987. <span class="italic">The journey of adulthood</span>. New York: Macmillan.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Behanan, K. T. 1937. <span class="italic">Yoga: A scientific evaluation</span>. New York: Macmillan.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bell, D. 1976. <span class="italic">The cultural contradictions of capitalism</span>. New York: Basic Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bellah, R. N. 1975. <span class="italic">The broken covenant: American civil religion in a time of trial</span>. New York: Seabury Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Benedict, R. 1934. <span class="italic">Patterns of culture</span>. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Berdyaev, N. 1952. <span class="italic">The beginning and the end</span>. London: Geoffrey Bles.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Berger, P. L., &amp; Luckmann, T. 1967. <span class="italic">The social construction of reality</span>. Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bergler, E. 1970. <span class="italic">The psychology of gambling</span>. New York: International Universities Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Berlyne, D. E. 1960. <span class="italic">Conflict, arousal, and curiosity</span>. New York: McGraw-Hill.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Berman, Marshall Howard. 1982. <span class="italic">All that is solid melts into air</span>. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Berman, Morris. 1988. The two faces of creativity. In J. Brockman, ed., <span class="italic">The reality club</span> (pp. 9–38). New York: Lynx Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bettelheim, B. 1943. Individual and mass behavior in extreme situations. <span class="italic">Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology</span> 38:417–52.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Binet, A. 1890. La concurrence des états psychologiques. <span class="italic">Revue Philosophique de la France et de l’Étranger</span> 24:138–55.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Blom, F. 1932. The Maya ball-game. In M. Ries, ed., <span class="italic">Middle American Research Series, 1</span>. New Orleans: Tulane University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bloom, A. 1987. <span class="italic">The closing of the American mind</span>. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Blumberg, S. H., &amp; Izard, C. E. 1985. Affective and cognitive characteristics of depression in 10- and 11-year-old children. <span class="italic">Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</span> 49:194–202.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Boring, E. G. 1953. A history of introspection. <span class="italic">Psychological Bulletin</span> 50(3):169–89.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Boswell, J. 1964. <span class="italic">Life of Samuel Johnson</span>. New York: McGraw.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bourguignon, E. 1979. <span class="italic">Psychological anthropology</span>. New York: Holt, Rinehart &amp; Winston.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bowen, E. S. (pseud. of Laura Bohannan). 1954. <span class="italic">Return to laughter</span>. New York: Harper &amp; Bros.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bowen, M. 1978. <span class="italic">Family therapy in clinical practice</span>. New York: Aronson.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bowlby, J. 1969. <span class="italic">Attachment and loss</span>. Vol. 1: <span class="italic">Attachment</span>. New York: Basic Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Boyd, R., &amp; Richerson, P. J. 1985. <span class="italic">Culture and the evolutionary process</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bradburn, N. 1969. <span class="italic">The structure of psychological well-being</span>. Chicago: Aldine.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Brandwein, R. A. 1977. After divorce: A focus on single parent families. <span class="italic">Urban and Social Change Review</span> 10:21–25.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Braudel, F. 1981. <span class="italic">The structures of everyday life</span>. Vol. 2: <span class="italic">Civilization and capitalism, 15th–18th century</span>. New York: Harper &amp; Row.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Bronfenbrenner, U. 1970. <span class="italic">Two worlds of childhood</span>. New York: Russell Sage.</p>
<a id="page284" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Brown, N. O. 1959. <span class="italic">Life against death</span>. Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Buhler, C. 1930. <span class="italic">Die geistige Entwicklung des Kindes</span>. Jena: G. Fischer.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Burhoe, R. W. 1976. The source of civilization in the natural selection of coadapted information in genes and cultures. <span class="italic">Zygon</span> 11(3):263–303.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1982. Pleasure and reason as adaptations to nature’s requirements. <span class="italic">Zygon</span> 17(2):113–31.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Burney, C. 1952. <span class="italic">Solitary confinement</span>. London: Macmillan.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Caillois, R. 1958. <span class="italic">Les jeux et les hommes</span>. Paris: Gallimard.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Calvin, W. H. 1986. <span class="italic">The river that flows uphill: A journey from the big bang to the big brain</span>. New York: Macmillan.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Campbell, A. P. 1972. Aspiration, satisfaction, and fulfillment. In A. P. Campbell &amp; P. E. Converse, eds., <span class="italic">The human meaning of social change</span> (pp. 441–66). New York: Russell Sage.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Campbell, A. P., Converse, P. E., &amp; Rodgers, W. L. 1976. <span class="italic">The quality of American life</span>. New York: Russell Sage.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Campbell, D. T. 1965. Variation and selective retention in socio-cultural evolution. In H. R. Barringer, G. I. Blankston, &amp; R. W. Monk, eds., <span class="italic">Social change in developing areas</span> (pp. 19–42). Cambridge: Schenkman.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1975. On the conflicts between biological and social evolution and between psychology and moral tradition. <span class="italic">American Psychologist</span> 30:1103–25.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1976. Evolutionary epistemology. In D. A. Schlipp, ed., <span class="italic">The library of living philosophers</span> (pp. 413–63). LaSalle, Ill.: Open Court.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Carli, M. 1986. Selezione psicologica e qualita dell’esperienza. In F. Massimini &amp; P. Inghilleri, eds., <span class="italic">L’esperienza quotidiana</span> (pp. 285–304). Milan: Franco Angeli.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Carpenter, E. 1970. <span class="italic">They became what they beheld</span>. New York: Ballantine.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1973. <span class="italic">Eskimo realities</span>. New York: Holt.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Carrington, P. 1977. <span class="italic">Freedom in meditation</span>. New York: Doubleday Anchor.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Carson, J. 1965. <span class="italic">Colonial Virginians at play</span>. Williamsburg, Va.: Colonial Williamsburg, Inc.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Carver, J. 1796. <span class="italic">Travels through the interior parts of North America</span>. Philadelphia.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Castaneda, C. 1971. <span class="italic">A separate reality</span>. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1974. <span class="italic">Tales of power</span>. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Chagnon, N. 1979. Mate competition, favoring close kin, and village fissioning among the Yanomamo Indians. In N. A. Chagnon &amp; W. Irons, eds., <span class="italic">Evolutionary biology and human social behavior</span> (pp. 86–132). North Scituate, Mass.: Duxbury Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Cheng, N. 1987. <span class="italic">Life and death in Shanghai</span>. New York: Grove Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry"><span class="italic">Chicago Tribune</span>. 24 September 1987.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry"><span class="italic">Chicago Tribune</span>. 18 October 1987.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Clark, A. 1919. <span class="italic">The working life of women in the seventeenth century</span>. London.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Clausen, J. A., ed. 1968. <span class="italic">Socialization and society</span>. Boston: Little, Brown.</p>
<a id="page285" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Cohler, B. J. 1982. Personal narrative and the life course. In P. B. Bates &amp; O. G. Brim, eds., <span class="italic">Life span development and behavior</span>, vol. 4. New York: Academic Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Collingwood, R. G. 1938. <span class="italic">The principles of art</span>. London: Oxford University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Conrad, P. 1982. <span class="italic">Television: The medium and its manners</span>. Boston: Routledge &amp; Kegan.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Cooley, C. H. 1902. <span class="italic">Human nature and the social order</span>. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Cooper, D. 1970. <span class="italic">The death of the family</span>. New York: Pantheon.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Cousins, N. 1979. <span class="italic">Anatomy of an illness as perceived by the patient</span>. New York: Norton.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Crandall, J. E. 1984. Social interest as a moderator of life stress. <span class="italic">Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</span> 47:164–74.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Crandall, M. 1983. On walking without touching the ground: “Play” in the <span class="italic">Inner Chapters</span> of the <span class="italic">Chuang-Tzu</span>. In V. H. Muir, ed., <span class="italic">Experimental essays on Chuang-Tzu</span> (pp. 101–23). Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Crealock, W. I. B. 1951. <span class="italic">Vagabonding under sail</span>. New York: David McKay.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Croce, B. 1902 (1909). <span class="italic">Aesthetics</span>. New York: Macmillan.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1962. <span class="italic">History as the story of liberty</span>. London: Allen &amp; Unwin.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Crook, J. H. 1980. <span class="italic">The evolution of human consciousness</span>. New York: Oxford University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, I. 1986. II flusso di coscienza in un contesto storico: II caso dei gesuiti. In F. Massimini &amp; P. Inghilleri, eds., <span class="italic">L’esperienza quotidiana</span> (pp. 181–96). Milan: Franco Angeli.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1988. Flow in a historical context: The case of the Jesuits. In M. Csikszentmihalyi &amp; I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds., <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness</span> (pp. 232–48). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1965. Artistic problems and their solution: An exploration of creativity in the arts. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1968. A cross-cultural comparison of some structural characteristics of group drinking. <span class="italic">Human Development</span> 11:201–16.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1969. The Americanization of rock climbing. <span class="italic">University of Chicago Magazine</span> 61(6):20–27.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1970. Sociological implications in the thought of Teilhard de Chardin. <span class="italic">Zygon</span> 5(2):130–47.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1973. Socio-cultural speciation and human aggression. <span class="italic">Zygon</span> 8(2):96–112.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1975. <span class="italic">Beyond boredom and anxiety</span>. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1978. Attention and the wholistic approach to behavior. In K. S. Pope &amp; J. L. Singer, eds., <span class="italic">The stream of consciousness</span> (pp. 335–58). New York: Plenum.</p>
<a id="page286" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1981a. Leisure and socialization. <span class="italic">Social Forces</span> 60:332–40.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1981b. Some paradoxes in the definition of play. In A. Cheska, ed., <span class="italic">Play as context</span> (pp. 14–26). New York: Leisure Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1982a. Towards a psychology of optimal experience. In L. Wheeler, ed., <span class="italic">Review of personality and social psychology</span>, vol. 2. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1982b. Learning, flow, and happiness. In R. Gross, ed., <span class="italic">Invitation to life-long learning</span> (pp. 167–87). New York: Fowlett.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1985a. Emergent motivation and the evolution of the self. In D. Kleiber &amp; M. H. Maehr, eds., <span class="italic">Motivation in adulthood</span> (pp. 93–113). Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1985b. Reflections on enjoyment. <span class="italic">Perspectives in Biology and Medicine</span> 28(4):469–97.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1987. The flow experience. In M. Eliade, ed., <span class="italic">The encyclopedia of religion</span>, vol. 5 (pp. 361–63). New York: Macmillan.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1988. The ways of genes and memes. <span class="italic">Reality Club Review</span> 1(1):107–28.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1989. Consciousness for the 21st century. Paper presented at the ELCA Meeting, <span class="italic">Year 2000 and Beyond</span>, March 30–April 2, St. Charles, Illinois.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Beattie, O. 1979. Life themes: A theoretical and empirical exploration of their origins and effects. <span class="italic">Journal of Humanistic Psychology</span> 19:45–63.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Csikszentmihalyi, I. S., eds. 1988. <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness</span>. New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Getzels, J. W. 1989. Creativity and problem finding. In F. H. Farley &amp; R. W. Neperud, eds., <span class="italic">The foundations of aesthetics</span> (pp. 91–116). New York: Praeger.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., Getzels, J. W., &amp; Kahn, S. 1984. <span class="italic">Talent and achievement: A longitudinal study of artists</span>. A report to the Spencer Foundation and to the MacArthur Foundation. Chicago: University of Chicago.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Graef, R. 1979. <span class="italic">Flow and the quality of experience in everyday life</span>. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1980. The experience of freedom in daily life. <span class="italic">American Journal of Community Psychology</span> 8:401–14.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Kubey, R. 1981. Television and the rest of life. <span class="italic">Public Opinion Quarterly</span> 45:317–28.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Larson, R. 1978. Intrinsic rewards in school crime. <span class="italic">Crime and Delinquency</span> 24:322–35.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1984. <span class="italic">Being adolescent: Conflict and growth in the teenage years</span>. New York: Basic Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1987. Validity and reliability of the Experience-Sampling Method. <span class="italic">Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease</span> 175(9):526–36.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., Larson, R., &amp; Prescott, S. 1977. The ecology of adolescent activity and experience. <span class="italic">Journal of Youth and Adolescence</span> 6:281–94.</p>
<a id="page287" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; LeFevre, J. 1987. The experience of work and leisure. <span class="italic">Third Canadian Leisure Research Conference</span>, Halifax, N.S., May 22–25.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1989. Optimal experience in work and leisure. <span class="italic">Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</span> 56(5):815–22.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Massimini, F. 1985. On the psychological selection of bio-cultural information. <span class="italic">New Ideas in Psychology</span> 3(2):115–38.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Nakamura, J. 1989. The dynamics of intrinsic motivation. In R. Ames &amp; C. Ames, eds., <span class="italic">Handbook of motivation theory and research</span>, vol. 3 (pp. 45–71). New York: Academic Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Rathunde, K. 1989. The psychology of wisdom: An evolutionary interpretation. In R. J. Sternberg, ed., <span class="italic">The psychology of wisdom</span>. New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Robinson, R. In press. <span class="italic">The art of seeing</span>. Malibu, Calif.: J. P. Getty Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Rochberg-Halton, E. 1981. <span class="italic">The meaning of things: Domestic symbols and the self</span>. New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Culin, S. 1906. Games of North American Indians. <span class="italic">24th Annual Report</span>. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of American Ethnology.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Cushing, F. H. 1896. Outlines of Zuni creation myths. <span class="italic">13th Annual Report</span>. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of American Ethnology.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Dalby, L. C. 1983. <span class="italic">Geisha</span>. Berkeley: University of California Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Damon, W., &amp; Hart, D. 1982. The development of self-understanding from infancy through adolescence. <span class="italic">Child Development</span> 53:831–57.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Dante, A. (1965). <span class="italic">The divine comedy</span>. Trans. G. L. Bickerstein. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">David, F. N. 1962. <span class="italic">Games, gods, and gambling</span>. New York: Hafner.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Davis, J. A. 1959. A formal interpretation of the theory of relative deprivation. <span class="italic">Sociometry</span> 22:280–96.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Dawkins, R. 1976. <span class="italic">The selfish gene</span>. New York: Oxford University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">deCharms, R. 1968. <span class="italic">Personal causation: The internal affective determinants of behavior</span>. New York: Academic Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Deci, E. L., &amp; Ryan, R. M. 1985. <span class="italic">Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior</span>. New York: Plenum Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Delle Fave, A., &amp; Massimini, F. 1988. Modernization and the changing contexts of flow in work and leisure. In M. Csikszentmihalyi &amp; I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds., <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Studies of flow in consciousness</span> (pp. 193–213). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">De Roberty, E. 1878. <span class="italic">La sociologie</span>. Paris.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">de Santillana, G. 1961 (1970). <span class="italic">The origins of scientific thought</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Devereux, E. 1970. Socialization in cross-cultural perspective: Comparative study of England, Germany, and the United States. In R. Hill &amp; R. Konig, eds., <span class="italic">Families in East and West: Socialization process and kinship ties</span> (pp. 72–106). Paris: Mouton.</p>
<a id="page288" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Diener, E. 1979. Deindividuation: The absence of self-awareness and self-regulation in group members. In P. Paulus, ed., <span class="italic">The psychology of group influence</span>. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1979. Deindividuation, self-awareness, and disinhibition. <span class="italic">Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</span> 37:1160–71.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Diener, E., Horwitz, J., &amp; Emmons, R. A. 1985. Happiness of the very wealthy. <span class="italic">Social Indicators Research</span> 16:263–74.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Dobzhansky, T. 1962. <span class="italic">Mankind evolving: The evolution of the human species</span>. New Haven: Yale University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1967. <span class="italic">The biology of ultimate concern</span>. New York: New American Library.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Draghicesco, D. 1906. <span class="italic">Du role de l’individu dans le determinisme social</span>. Paris.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Dulles, F. R. 1965. <span class="italic">A history of recreation: America learns to play</span>. 2d ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Durkheim, E. 1897 (1951). <span class="italic">Suicide</span>. New York: Free Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1912 (1967). <span class="italic">The elementary forms of religious life</span>. New York: Free Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Easterlin, R. A. 1974. Does economic growth improve the human lot? Some empirical evidence. In P. A. David &amp; M. Abramovitz, eds., <span class="italic">Nations and households in economic growth</span>. New York: Academic Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Eckblad, G. 1981. <span class="italic">Scheme theory: A conceptual framework for cognitive-motivational processes</span>. London: Academic Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Ekman, P. 1972. Universals and cultural differences in facial expressions of emotions. In <span class="italic">Current theory in research on motivation, Nebraska symposium on motivation</span>, vol. 19 (pp. 207–83). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Eliade, M. 1969. <span class="italic">Yoga: Immortality and freedom</span>. Princeton: Princeton University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Emde, R. 1980. Toward a psychoanalytic theory of affect. In S. Greenspan &amp; E. Pollack, eds., <span class="italic">The course of life</span>. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry"><span class="italic">Encyclopaedia Britannica</span>. 1985. 15th ed. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Erikson, E. H. 1950. <span class="italic">Childhood and society</span>. New York: W. W. Norton.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1958. <span class="italic">Young man Luther</span>. New York: W. W. Norton.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1969. <span class="italic">Gandhi’s truth: On the origins of militant nonviolence</span>. New York: W. W. Norton.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1940 (1978). <span class="italic">The Nuer</span>. New York: Oxford University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Eysenck, M. W. 1982. <span class="italic">Attention and arousal</span>. Berlin: Springer Verlag.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Ferenczi, S. 1950. Sunday neuroses. In S. Ferenczi, ed., <span class="italic">Further contributions to the theory and technique of psychoanalysis</span> (pp. 174–77). London: Hogarth Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Fine, R. 1956. Chess and chess masters. <span class="italic">Psychoanalysis</span> 3:7–77.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Fiore, G. 1973. <span class="italic">Antonio Gramsci: Life of a revolutionary</span>. New York: Schocken Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Fisher, A. L. 1969. <span class="italic">The essential writings of Merleau-Ponty</span>. New York: Harcourt Brace.</p>
<a id="page289" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Fortune, R. F. 1932 (1963). <span class="italic">Sorcerers of Dobu</span>. New York: Dutton.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Fox, V. 1977. Is adolescence a phenomenon of modern times? <span class="italic">Journal of Psychiatry</span> 1:271–90.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Frankl, V. 1963. <span class="italic">Man’s search for meaning</span>. New York: Washington Square.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1978. <span class="italic">The unheard cry for meaning</span>. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Freeman, M. 1989. Paul Ricoeur on interpretation: The model of the text and the idea of development. <span class="italic">Human Development</span> 28:295–312.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Freeman, M., Larson, R., &amp; Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1986. Immediate experience and its recollection. <span class="italic">Merrill Palmer Quarterly</span> 32(2):167–85.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Freeman, M., &amp; Robinson, R. E. In press. The development within: An alternative approach to the study of lives. <span class="italic">New Ideas in Psychology</span>.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Freud, S. 1921. Massenpsychologie und Ich-Analyse. <span class="italic">Vienna Gesammelte Schriften</span> 6:261.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1930 (1961). <span class="italic">Civilization and its discontents</span>. New York: Norton.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Frijda, N. H. 1986. <span class="italic">The emotions</span>. New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Gallup, G. H. 1976. Human needs and satisfactions: A global survey. <span class="italic">Public Opinion Quarterly</span> 40:459–67.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Gardner, H. 1983. <span class="italic">Frames of mind</span>. New York: Basic Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Garrett, H. E. 1941. <span class="italic">Great experiments in psychology</span>. Boston: Appleton Century Crofts.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Gedo, M. M., ed. 1986–88. <span class="italic">Psychoanalytic perspectives on art</span>. Vol. 1, 1986; vol. 2, 1987; vol. 3, 1988. Hillsdale, N.J.: Analytic Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Geertz, C. 1973. <span class="italic">The interpretation of culture</span>. New York: Basic Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Gendlin, E. T. 1962. <span class="italic">Experiencing and the creation of meaning</span>. Glencoe: Free Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1981. <span class="italic">Focusing</span>. New York: Bantam.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry"><span class="italic">General Social Survey</span>. 1989 (March). Chicago: National Opinion Research Center.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Gergen, K., &amp; Gergen, M. 1983. Narrative of the self. In T. Sarbin &amp; K. Scheibe, eds., <span class="italic">Studies in social identity</span> (pp. 254–73). New York: Praeger.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1984. The social construction of narrative accounts. In K. Gergen &amp; M. Gergen, eds., <span class="italic">Historical social psychology</span> (pp. 173–89). Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Getzels, J. W., &amp; Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1965. <span class="italic">Creative thinking in art students: The process of discovery</span>. HEW Cooperative Research Report S-080, University of Chicago.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1976. <span class="italic">The creative vision: A longitudinal study of problem finding in art</span>. New York: Wiley Interscience.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Gilpin, L. 1948. <span class="italic">Temples in Yucatan</span>. New York: Hastings House.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Gladwin, T. 1970. <span class="italic">East is a big bird: Navigation and logic on Puluat atoll</span>. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Glick, P. G. 1979. Children of divorced parents in demographic perspective. <span class="italic">Journal of Social Issues</span> 35:170–82.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Goertzel, V., &amp; Goertzel, M. G. 1962. <span class="italic">Cradles of eminence</span>. Boston: Little, Brown.</p>
<a id="page290" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Goffman, E. 1969. <span class="italic">Strategic interaction</span>. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1974. <span class="italic">Frame analysis: An essay on the organization of experience</span>. New York: Harper &amp; Row.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Gombrich, E. H. 1954. Psychoanalysis and the history of art. <span class="italic">International Journal of Psychoanalysis</span> 35:1–11.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1979. <span class="italic">The sense of order</span>. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Gouldner, A. W. 1968. The sociologist as partisan: Sociology and the welfare state. <span class="italic">American Sociologist</span> 3:103–16.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Graef, R. 1978. <span class="italic">An analysis of the person by situation interaction through repeated measures</span>. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Graef, R., Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Giannino, S. M. 1983. Measuring intrinsic motivation in everyday life. <span class="italic">Leisure Studies</span> 2:155–68.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Graef, R., McManama Gianinno, S., &amp; Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1981. Energy consumption in leisure and perceived happiness. In J. D. Clayton et al., eds., <span class="italic">Consumers and energy conservation</span>. New York: Praeger.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Graves, R. 1960. <span class="italic">The white goddess: A historical grammar of poetic myth</span>. New York: Vintage Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Griessman, B. E. 1987. <span class="italic">The achievement factors</span>. New York: Dodd, Mead.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Groos, K. 1901. <span class="italic">The play of man</span>. New York: Appleton.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Gross, R., ed. 1982. <span class="italic">Invitation to life-long learning</span>. New York: Fowlett.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry. 1958 (August). <span class="italic">The psychiatrist’s interest in leisure-time activities</span>. Report 39, New York.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Gussen, J. 1967. The psychodynamics of leisure. In P. A. Martin, ed., <span class="italic">Leisure and mental health: A psychiatric viewpoint</span> (pp. 51–169). Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Habakuk, H. J. 1955. Family structure and economic change in nineteenth century Europe. <span class="italic">Journal of Economic History</span> 15 (January):1–12.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hadas, N. 1960 (1972). <span class="italic">Humanism: The Greek ideal and its survival</span>. Gloucester, Mass.: C. P. Smith.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hamilton, J. A. 1976. Attention and intrinsic rewards in the control of psycho-physiological states. <span class="italic">Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics</span> 27:54–61.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1981. Attention, personality, and self-regulation of mood: Absorbing interest and boredom. In B. A. Maher, ed., <span class="italic">Progress in Experimental Personality Research</span> 10:282–315.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hamilton, J. A., Haier, R. J., &amp; Buchsbaum, M. S. 1984. Intrinsic enjoyment and boredom coping scales: Validation with personality evoked potential and attentional measures. <span class="italic">Personality and Individual Differences</span> 5(2):183–93.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hamilton, J. A., Holcomb, H. H., &amp; De la Pena, A. 1977. Selective attention and eye movements while viewing reversible figures. <span class="italic">Perceptual and Motor Skills</span> 44:639–44.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hamilton, M. 1982. Symptoms and assessment of depression. In E. S. Paykel, ed., <span class="italic">Handbook of affective disorders</span>. New York: Guilford Press.</p>
<a id="page291" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hamilton, W. D. 1964. The genetical evolution of social behavior: Parts 1 and 2. <span class="italic">Journal of Theoretical Biology</span> 7:1–52.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Harrow, M., Grinker, R. R., Holzman, P. S., &amp; Kayton, L. 1977. Anhedonia and schizophrenia. <span class="italic">American Journal of Psychiatry</span> 134:794–97.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Harrow, M., Tucker, G. J., Hanover, N. H., &amp; Shield, P. 1972. Stimulus overinclusion in schizophrenic disorders. <span class="italic">Archives of General Psychiatry</span> 27:40–45.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hasher, L., &amp; Zacks, R. T. 1979. Automatic and effortful processes in memory. <span class="italic">Journal of Experimental Psychology: General</span> 108:356–88.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hauser, A. 1951. <span class="italic">The social history of art</span>. New York: Knopf.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hebb, D. O. 1955. Drive and the CNS. <span class="italic">Psychological Review</span> (July) 243–52.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hegel, G. F. 1798 (1974). <span class="italic">Lectures on the philosophy of religion, together with a work on the proofs of the existence of God</span>. Trans. E. B. Speirs. New York: Humanities Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Heidegger, M. 1962. <span class="italic">Being and time</span>. London: SCM Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1967. <span class="italic">What is a thing?</span> Chicago: Regnery.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Henry, J. 1965. <span class="italic">Culture against man</span>. New York: Vintage.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hetherington, E. M. 1979. Divorce: A child’s perspective. <span class="italic">American Psychologist</span> 34:851–58.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hilgard, E. 1980. The trilogy of mind: Cognition, affection, and conation. <span class="italic">Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences</span> 16:107–17.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hiscock, E. C. 1968. <span class="italic">Atlantic cruise in Wanderer III</span>. London: Oxford University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hoffman, J. E., Nelson, B., &amp; Houck, M. R. 1983. The role of attentional resources in automatic detection. <span class="italic">Cognitive Psychology</span> 51:379–410.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Hoffman, L. 1981. <span class="italic">Foundations of family therapy: A conceptual framework for systems change</span>. New York: Basic Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Holmes, T. H., &amp; Rahe, R. H. 1967. The social readjustment rating scale. <span class="italic">Journal of Psychometric Research</span> 11:213–18.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Howell, M. C. 1986. <span class="italic">Women, production, and patriarchy in late medieval cities</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Huizinga, J. 1939 (1970). <span class="italic">Homo ludens: A study of the play element in culture</span>. New York: Harper &amp; Row.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1954. <span class="italic">The waning of the Middle Ages</span>. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Husserl, E. 1962. <span class="italic">Ideas: General introduction to pure phenomenology</span>. New York: Collier.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Huxley, J. S. 1942. <span class="italic">Evolution: The modern synthesis</span>. London: Allen and Unwin.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Izard, C. E., Kagan, J., &amp; Zajonc, R. B. 1984. <span class="italic">Emotions, cognition, and behavior</span>. New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Jackson, D. D. 1957. The question of family homeostasis. <span class="italic">Psychiatric Quarterly Supplement</span> 31:79–90.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">James, W. 1890. <span class="italic">Principles of psychology: Vol. 1</span>. New York: Henry Holt.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Jaspers, K. 1923. <span class="italic">Psychopathologie generale</span>. 3d ed. Paris.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1955. <span class="italic">Reason and Existenz</span>. New York: Noonday.</p>
<a id="page292" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Jaynes, J. 1977. <span class="italic">The origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the bicameral mind</span>. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Johnson, R. 1988. Thinking yourself into a win. <span class="italic">American Visions</span> 3:6–10.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Johnson, Samuel. 1958. <span class="italic">Works of Samuel Johnson</span>. New Haven: Yale University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Johnson, Skuli. 1930. <span class="italic">Pioneers of freedom: An account of the Icelanders and the Icelandic free state</span>, 879–1262. Boston: Stratford Co.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Johnston, L., Bachman, J., &amp; O’Malley, P. 1981. <span class="italic">Student drug use in America</span>. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institute of Drug Abuse.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Jones, E. 1931. The problem of Paul Morphy. <span class="italic">International Journal of Psychoanalysis</span> 12:1–23.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Jung, C. G. 1928 (1960). On psychic energy. In C. G. <span class="italic">Jung, collected works</span>, vol. 8. Princeton: Princeton University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1933 (1961). <span class="italic">Modern man in search of a soul</span>. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kahneman, D. 1973. <span class="italic">Attention and effort</span>. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kant, I. 1781 (1969). <span class="italic">Critique of pure reason</span>. Trans. N. Smith. New York: St. Martin’s.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kaplan, B. 1983. A trio of trials. In R. M. Lerner, ed., <span class="italic">Developmental psychology: Historical and philosophical perspectives</span>. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kelly, J. R. 1982. <span class="italic">Leisure</span>. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Keyes, R. 1985. <span class="italic">Chancing it: Why we take risks</span>. Boston: Little, Brown.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kiell, N. 1969. <span class="italic">The universal experience of adolescence</span>. London: University of London Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kierkegaard, S. 1944. <span class="italic">The concept of dread</span>. Princeton: Princeton University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1954. <span class="italic">Fear and trembling, and the sickness unto death</span>. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Klausner, S. Z. 1965. <span class="italic">The quest for self-control</span>. New York: Free Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kobasa, S. C., Maddi, S. R., &amp; Kahn, S. 1982. Hardiness and health: A prospective study. <span class="italic">Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</span> 42:168–77.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Koch, K. 1970. <span class="italic">Wishes, lies, and dreams: Teaching children to write poetry</span>. New York: Chelsea House.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1977. <span class="italic">I never told anybody: Teaching poetry writing in a nursing home</span>. New York: Random House.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kohak, E. 1978. <span class="italic">Idea &amp; experience: Edmund Husserl’s project of phenomenology</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kohl, J. G. 1860. <span class="italic">Kitchi-Gami: Wanderings round Lake Superior</span>. London.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kohlberg, L. 1984. <span class="italic">The psychology of moral development: Essays on moral development</span>, vol. 2. San Francisco: Harper &amp; Row.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kolakowski, L. 1987. <span class="italic">Husserl and the search for certitude</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kubey, R., &amp; Csikszentmihalyi, M. In press. <span class="italic">Television and the quality of life</span>. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.</p>
<a id="page293" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kuhn, T. S. 1962. <span class="italic">The structure of scientific revolutions</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Kusyszyn, I. 1977. How gambling saved me from a misspent sabbatical. <span class="italic">Journal of Humanistic Psychology</span> 17:19–25.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">La Berge, S. 1985. <span class="italic">Lucid dreaming: The power of being awake and aware of your dreams</span>. Los Angeles: Jeremy Tarcher.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Laing, R. D. 1960. <span class="italic">The divided self</span>. London: Tavistock.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1961. <span class="italic">The self and others</span>. London: Tavistock.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Larson, R. 1985. Emotional scenarios in the writing process: An examination of young writers’ affective experiences. In M. Rose, ed., <span class="italic">When a writer can’t write</span> (pp. 19–42). New York: Guilford Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1988. Flow and writing. In M. Csikszentmihalyi &amp; I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds., <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness</span> (pp. 150–71). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Larson, R., &amp; Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1978. Experiential correlates of solitude in adolescence. <span class="italic">Journal of Personality</span> 46(4):677–93.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1980. The significance of time alone in adolescents’ development. <span class="italic">Journal of Adolescent Medicine</span> 2 (6):33–40.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1983. The Experience Sampling Method. In H. T. Reis, ed., <span class="italic">Naturalistic approaches to studying social interaction (New Directions for Methodology of Social and Behavioral Science, No. 15)</span>. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Larson, R., Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Graef, R. 1980. Mood variability and the psychosocial adjustment of adolescents. <span class="italic">Journal of Youth and Adolescence</span> 9:469–90.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Larson, R., &amp; Kubey, R. 1983. Television and music: Contrasting media in adolescent life. <span class="italic">Youth and Society</span> 15:13–31.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Larson, R., Mannell, R., &amp; Zuzanek, J. 1986. Daily well-being of older adults with family and friends. <span class="italic">Psychology and Aging</span> 1(2):117–26.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Laski, M. 1962. <span class="italic">Ecstasy: A study of some secular and religious experiences</span>. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Laszlo, E. 1970. <span class="italic">System, structure and experience</span>. New York: Gordon &amp; Breach.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lazarus, R. S., &amp; Folkman, S. 1984. <span class="italic">Stress, appraisal, and coping</span>. New York: Springer.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Le Bon, G. 1895 (1960). <span class="italic">The crowd</span>. New York: Viking.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lecourt, D. 1977. <span class="italic">Proletarian science</span>. London: New Left Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lee, R. B. 1975. What hunters do for a living. In R. B. Lee &amp; I. de Vore, eds., <span class="italic">Man the hunter</span> (pp. 30–48). Chicago: Aldine.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Leenhardt, M. 1947 (1979). <span class="italic">Do Kamo</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">LeFevre, J. 1988. Flow and the quality of experience in work and leisure. In M. Csikszentmihalyi &amp; I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds., <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness</span> (pp. 317–18). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Le Goff, J. 1980. <span class="italic">Time, work, and culture in the Middle Ages</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Le Roy Ladurie, L. 1979. <span class="italic">Montaillou</span>. New York: Vintage.</p>
<a id="page294" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lessard, S. 1987. Profiles: Eva Zeisel. <span class="italic">New Yorker</span> April 13, 60–82.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Le Vine, R. A., &amp; Campbell, D. T. 1972. <span class="italic">Ethnocentrism: Theories of conflict, ethnic attitudes, and group behavior</span>. New York: Wiley.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lévi-Strauss, C. 1947 (1969). <span class="italic">Les structures élementaires de la parenté</span>. Paris: PUF.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lewin, K., et al. 1944 (1962). Level of aspiration. In J. McV. Hunt, ed., <span class="italic">Personality and behavioral disorders</span> (pp. 333–78). New York: Ronald Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lewinsohn, P. M., &amp; Graf, M. 1973. Pleasant activities and depression. <span class="italic">Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology</span> 41:261–68.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lewinsohn, P. M., &amp; Libet, J. 1972. Pleasant events, activity schedules, and depression. <span class="italic">Journal of Abnormal Psychology</span> 79:291–95.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lewinsohn, P. M., et al. 1982. Behavioral therapy: Clinical applications. In A. J. Rush, ed., <span class="italic">Short-term therapies for depression</span>. New York: Guilford.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Liberman, A. M., Mattingly, I. G., &amp; Turvey, M. T. 1972. Language codes and memory codes. In A. W. Melton &amp; E. Martin, eds., <span class="italic">Coding processes in human memory</span>. New York: Wiley.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lieberman, M. A., et al. 1979. <span class="italic">Self-help groups for coping with crisis: Origins, members, processes, and impact</span>. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lindbergh, C. 1953. <span class="italic">The Spirit of St. Louis</span>. New York: Scribner.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lipps, G. F. 1899. <span class="italic">Grundriss der psychophysik</span>. Leipzig: G. J. Goschen.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Loevinger, J. 1976. <span class="italic">Ego development</span>. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Logan, R. 1985. The “flow experience” in solitary ordeals. <span class="italic">Journal of Humanistic Psychology</span> 25(4):79–89.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1988. Flow in solitary ordeals. In M. Csikszentmihalyi &amp; I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds., <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness</span> (pp. 172–80). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lumdsen, C. J., &amp; Wilson, E. O. 1981. <span class="italic">Genes, mind, culture: The coevolutionary process</span>. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1983. <span class="italic">Promethean fire: Reflections on the origin of mind</span>. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lumholtz, C. 1902 (1987). <span class="italic">Unknown Mexico</span>, vol. 1. New York: Dover Publications.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Luria, A. R. 1976. <span class="italic">Cognitive development: Its cultural and social foundations</span>. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Lyons, A. W. 1988. <span class="italic">Role models: Criteria for selection and life cycle changes</span>. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">McAdams, D. 1985. <span class="italic">Power, intimacy and the life story</span>. Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">MacAloon, J. 1981. <span class="italic">This great symbol</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Macbeth, J. 1988. Ocean cruising. In M. Csikszentmihalyi &amp; I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds., <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness</span> (pp. 214–31). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">McDougall, W. 1920. <span class="italic">The group mind</span>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">McGhie, A., &amp; Chapman, J. 1961. Disorders of attention and perception in early schizophrenia. <span class="italic">British Journal of Medical Psychology</span> 34:103–16.</p>
<a id="page295" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">MacIntyre, A. 1984. <span class="italic">After virtue: A study in moral therapy</span>. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">McLanahan, S. 1988. <span class="italic">Single mothers and their children: A new American dilemma</span>. New York: University Press of America.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">MacPhillamy, D. J., &amp; Lewinsohn, P. M. 1974. Depression as a function of levels of desired and obtained pleasure. <span class="italic">Journal of Abnormal Psychology</span> 83:651–57.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">MacVannel, J. A. 1896. <span class="italic">Hegel’s doctrine of the will</span>. New York: Columbia University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Malcolm X. 1977. <span class="italic">The autobiography of Malcolm X</span>. New York: Ballantine.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Mall, J. 1985. A study of U.S. teen pregnancy rate. <span class="italic">Los Angeles Times</span>, March 17, p. 27.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Mandler, G. 1975. <span class="italic">Man and emotion</span>. New York: Wiley.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Marcuse, H. 1955. <span class="italic">Eros and civilization</span>. Boston: Beacon.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1964. <span class="italic">One-dimensional man</span>. Boston: Beacon.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Martin, J. 1981. Relative deprivation: A theory of distributive injustice for an era of shrinking resources. <span class="italic">Research in Organizational Behavior</span> 3:53–107.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Marx, K. 1844 (1956). <span class="italic">Karl Marx: Selected writings in sociology and social philosophy</span>. Ed. T. B. Bottomore &amp; Maximilien Rubel. London: Watts.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Maslow, A. 1954. <span class="italic">Motivation and personality</span>. New York: Harper.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1968. <span class="italic">Toward a psychology of being</span>. New York: Van Nostrand.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1969. <span class="italic">The psychology of science</span>. Chicago: Regnery.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——, ed. 1970. <span class="italic">New knowledge in human values</span>. Chicago: Regnery.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1971. <span class="italic">The farther reaches of human nature</span>. New York: Viking.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Maslow, A., &amp; Honigmann, J. J. 1970. Synergy: Some notes of Ruth Benedict. <span class="italic">American Anthropologist</span> 72:320–33.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Mason, H., trans. 1971. <span class="italic">Gilgamesh</span>. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Massimini, F. 1982. Individuo e ambiente: I papua Kapauku della Nuova Guinea occidentale. In F. Perussia, ed., <span class="italic">Psicologia ed ecologia</span> (pp. 27–154). Milan: Franco Angeli.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Massimini, F., Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Carli, M. 1987. The monitoring of optimal experience: A tool for psychiatric rehabilitation. <span class="italic">Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease</span> 175(9):545–49.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Massimini, F., Csikszentmihalyi, M., &amp; Delle Fave, A. 1988. Flow and biocultural evolution. In M. Csikszentmihalyi &amp; I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds., <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Studies of flow in consciousness</span> (pp. 60–81). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Massimini, F., &amp; Inghilleri, P., eds., 1986. <span class="italic">L’Esperienza quotidiana: Teoria e metodo d’analisi</span>. Milan: Franco Angeli.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Matas, L., Arend, R. A., &amp; Sroufe, L. A. 1978. Continuity of adaptation in the second year: The relationship between quality of attachment and later competence. <span class="italic">Child Development</span> 49:547–56.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Matson, K. 1980. <span class="italic">Short lives: Portraits of creativity and self-destruction</span>. New York: Morrow.</p>
<a id="page296" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Mayers, P. 1978. <span class="italic">Flow in adolescence and its relation to the school experience</span>. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Mead, G. H. 1934 (1970). <span class="italic">Mind, self and society</span>. Ed. C. W. Morris. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Mead, M. 1964. <span class="italic">Continuities in cultural evolution</span>. New Haven: Yale University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Medawar, P. 1960. <span class="italic">The future of man</span>. New York: Basic Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Medvedev, Z. 1971. <span class="italic">The rise and fall of Dr. Lysenko</span>. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Merleau-Ponty, M. 1962. <span class="italic">Phenomenology of perception</span>. New York: Humanities.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1964. <span class="italic">The primacy of perception</span>. Ed. J. M. Edie. Evanston, Ill.: North-western University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Merser, C. 1987. A throughly modern identity crisis. <span class="italic">Self</span> October, 147.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Meyer, L. B. 1956. <span class="italic">Emotion and meaning in music</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Michalos, A. C. 1985. Multiple discrepancy theory (MDT). <span class="italic">Social Indicators Research</span> 16:347–413.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Miller, G. A. 1956. The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity to process information. <span class="italic">Psychological Review</span> 63:81–97.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1983. Informavors. In F. Machlup &amp; U. Mansfield, eds., <span class="italic">The study of information</span>. New York: Wiley.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Miller, G. A., Galanter, E. H., &amp; Pribram, K. 1960. <span class="italic">Plans and the structure of behavior</span>. New York: Holt.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Mintz, S. 1985. <span class="italic">Sweetness and power: The place of sugar in modern history</span>. New York: Viking.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Mitchell, R. G., Jr. 1983. <span class="italic">Mountain experience: The psychology and sociology of adventure</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1988. Sociological implications of the flow experience. In M. Csikszentmihalyi &amp; I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds., <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness</span> (pp. 36–59). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Mitterauer, M., &amp; Sieder, R. 1983. <span class="italic">The European family: Patriarchy to partnership from the Middle Ages to the present</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Moitessier, B. 1971. <span class="italic">The long way</span>. Trans. W. Rodarmor. London: Granada.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Montaigne, M. de. 1580 (1958). <span class="italic">The complete essays of Montaigne</span>. Trans. Donald M. Frame. Stanford: Stanford University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Monti, F. 1969. <span class="italic">African masks</span>. London: Paul Hamlyn.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Murphy, G. 1947. <span class="italic">Personality: A biosocial approach to origins and structure</span>. New York: Harper.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Murray, G. 1940. <span class="italic">Stoic, Christian and humanist</span>. London: S. Allen &amp; Unwin.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Murray, H. A. 1955. American Icarus. <span class="italic">Clinical Studies of Personality</span>, vol. 2. New York: Harper.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Nabokov, P. 1981. <span class="italic">Indian running</span>. Santa Barbara: Capra Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Nakamura, J. 1988. Optimal experience and the uses of talent. In M. Csikszentmihalyi &amp; I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds., <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Psychological <a id="page297" class="calibre2"></a>studies of flow in consciousness</span> (pp. 319–26). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Natanson, M. A., ed. 1963. <span class="italic">Philosophy of the social sciences</span>. New York: Random House.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Neisser, U. 1967. <span class="italic">Cognitive psychology</span>. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1976. <span class="italic">Cognition and reality</span>. San Francisco: Freeman.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Nell, V. 1988. <span class="italic">Lost in a book: The psychology of reading for pleasure</span>. New Haven: Yale University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Nelson, A. 1965. Self-images and systems of spiritual direction in the history of European civilization. In S. Z. Klausner, ed., <span class="italic">The quest for self-control</span> (pp. 49–103). New York: Free Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry"><span class="italic">Newsweek</span>. 5 October 1987.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry"><span class="italic">New Yorker</span>. 5 October 1987, pp. 33–35.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Nietzsche, F. 1886 (1989). <span class="italic">Beyond good and evil: Prelude to a philosophy of the future</span>. Trans. W. Kaufmann. New York: Random House.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1887 (1974). <span class="italic">Genealogy of morals and peoples and countries</span>. New York: Gordon Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Nitecki, M. H., ed. 1988. <span class="italic">Evolutionary progress</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Noelle-Neumann, E. 1983. <span class="italic">Spiegel-Dokumentation: Personlickeitsstarke</span>. Hamburg: Springer Verlag.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1984. <span class="italic">The spiral of silence: Public opinion—our social skin</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1985. Identifying opinion leaders. Paper presented at the 38th ESOMAR Conference, Wiesbaden, West Germany, Sept. 1–5.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Noelle-Neumann, E., &amp; Strumpel, B. 1984. <span class="italic">Mach Arbeit krank? Macht Arbeit glucklich?</span> Munich: Pieper Verlag.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Nusbaum, H. C., &amp; Schwab, E. C., eds. 1986. The role of attention and active processing in speech perception. In <span class="italic">Pattern recognition by humans and machines</span>, vol. 1 (pp. 113–57). New York: Academic Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Offer, D., Ostrov, E., &amp; Howard, K. 1981. <span class="italic">The adolescent: A psychological self-portrait</span>. New York: Basic Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Orme, J. E. 1969. <span class="italic">Time, experience, and behavior</span>. London: Iliffe.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Pagels, H. 1988. <span class="italic">The dreams of reason—the computer and the rise of the sciences of complexity</span>. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Pareto, V. 1917. <span class="italic">Traite de sociologie generale</span>, vol. 1. Paris.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1919. <span class="italic">Traite de sociologie generale</span>, vol. 2. Paris.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Parsons, T. 1942. Age and sex in the social structure. <span class="italic">American Sociological Review</span> 7:604–16.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Piaget, J. 1952. <span class="italic">The origins of intelligence in children</span>. New York: International Universities Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Pina Chan, R. 1969. <span class="italic">Spiele und Sport in alten Mexico</span>. Leipzig: Edition Leipzig.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Pitts, Jesse R. 1964. The case of the French bourgeoisie. In R. L. Coser, ed., <span class="italic">The family: Its structure and functions</span>. New York: St. Martin’s Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Plato. <span class="italic">Republic</span>, book 3, 401.</p>
<a id="page298" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Polanyi, M. 1968. The body-mind relation. In W. R. Coulson &amp; C. R. Rogers, eds., <span class="italic">Man and the science of man</span> (pp. 84–133). Columbus: Bell &amp; Howell.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1969. <span class="italic">Knowing and being</span>. Ed. Marjorie Grene. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Pope, K. S. 1980. <span class="italic">On love and loving</span>. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Pope, K. S., &amp; Singer, J. L. 1978. <span class="italic">The stream of consciousness</span>. New York: Plenum.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Prigogine, I. 1980. <span class="italic">From being to becoming: Time and complexity in the physical sciences</span>. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Privette, G. 1983. Peak experience, peak performance, and flow: A comparative analysis of positive human experiences. <span class="italic">Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</span> 83(45):1361–68.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Radin, P. 1927. <span class="italic">Primitive man as philosopher</span>. New York: D. Appleton &amp; Co.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Rathunde, K. 1988. Optimal experience and the family context. In M. Csikszentmihalyi &amp; I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds., <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness</span> (pp. 342–63). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Redfield, R., ed. 1942. <span class="italic">Levels of integration in biological and social systems</span>. Lancaster, Pa.: J. Catell Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1955. <span class="italic">The little community: Viewpoints for the study of a human whole</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Renfrew, C. 1986. Varna and the emergence of wealth in prehistoric Europe. In A. Appadurai, ed., <span class="italic">The social life of things</span> (pp. 141–68). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Ribot, T. A. 1890. <span class="italic">The psychology of attention</span>. Chicago: Open Court Publishing.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Richards, R., Kinney, D. K., Lunde, I., Benet, M., et al. 1988. Creativity in manic depressives, cyclothymes, their normal relatives, and control subjects. <span class="italic">Journal of Abnormal Psychology</span> 97(3):281–88.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Robinson, D. 1969. The climber as visionary. <span class="italic">Ascent</span> 9:4–10.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Robinson, J. P. 1977. <span class="italic">How Americans use time</span>. New York: Praeger.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Robinson, R. E. 1986. Differenze tra i sessi e rendimento scolastico: Aspetti dell’esperienza quotidiana degli adolescenti dotati in matematica. In F. Massimini &amp; P. Inghilleri, eds., <span class="italic">L’esperienza quotidiana</span> (pp. 417–36). Milan: Franco Angeli.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1988. Project and prejudice: Past, present, and future in adult development. <span class="italic">Human Development</span> 31:158–75.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Rogers, C. 1951. <span class="italic">Client-centered therapy</span>. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Roueché, B. 1988. Annals of medicine. <span class="italic">New Yorker</span> Sept. 12, 83–89.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Sacks, O. 1970 (1987). <span class="italic">The man who mistook his wife for a hat</span>. New York: Harper &amp; Row.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Sahlins, M.D. 1972. <span class="italic">Stone age economics</span>. Chicago: Aldine Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1976. <span class="italic">The use and abuse of biology: An anthropological critique of sociobiology</span>. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Santayana, G. 1986. <span class="italic">The sense of beauty</span>. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Sarbin, T., ed. 1986. <span class="italic">Narrative psychology: The storied nature of human conduct</span>. New York: Praeger.</p>
<a id="page299" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Sartre, J. P. 1956. <span class="italic">Being and nothingness</span>. New York: Philosophical Library.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Sato, I. 1988. Bosozoku: Flow in Japanese motorcycle gangs. In M. Csikszentmihalyi &amp; I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds., <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness</span> (pp. 92–117). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Schaefer, C., Coyne, J. C., &amp; Lazarus, R. S. 1981. The health-related functions of social support. <span class="italic">Journal of Behavioral Medicine</span> 4(4):381–406.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Schafer, R. 1980. Narration in the psychoanalytic dialogue. <span class="italic">Critical Inquiry</span> 7:29–54.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Scheier, M. F., &amp; Carver, C. S. 1980 Private and public self-attention, resistance to change, and dissonance reduction. <span class="italic">Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</span> 39:390–405.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Schiamberg, L. B. 1988. <span class="italic">Child and adolescent development</span>. New York: Macmillan.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Schlick, M. 1934. Uber das Fundament der Erkentniss. <span class="italic">Erkentniss</span> 4. English translation in A. J. Ayer, ed., 1959, <span class="italic">Logical positivism</span>. New York: Free Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Schneider, E. 1953. <span class="italic">Coleridge, opium, and Kubla Khan</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Scholem, G. 1969. <span class="italic">Major trends in Jewish mysticism</span>. New York: Schocken Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Schrödinger E. 1947. <span class="italic">What is life? The physical aspects of the living cell</span>. New York: Macmillan.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Schutz, A. 1962. <span class="italic">The problem of social reality</span>. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Schwartz, G. 1987. <span class="italic">Beyond conformity and rebellion</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Schwarz, N., &amp; Clore, G. L. 1983. Mood, misattribution, and judgments of well-being: Informative and directive functions of affective states. <span class="italic">Journal of Personality and Social Psychology</span> 45:513–23.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Seligman, M. E. P. 1975. <span class="italic">Helplessness: On depression, development, and death</span>. San Francisco: Freeman.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Seligman, M. E. P., Peterson, C., Kaslow, N. J., Tannenbaum, R. L., Alloy, L. B., &amp; Abramson, L. Y. 1984. Attributional style and depressive symptoms among children. <span class="italic">Journal of Abnormal Psychology</span> 93:235–38.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Selye, H. 1956 (1978). <span class="italic">The stress of life</span>. Rev. ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Siegel, B. S. 1986. <span class="italic">Love, medicine, and miracles</span>. New York: Harper &amp; Row.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Simon, H. A. 1969. <span class="italic">Sciences of the artificial</span>. Boston: MIT Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1978. Rationality as process and as product of thought. <span class="italic">American Economic Review</span> 68:1–16.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Singer, I. 1981. <span class="italic">The nature of love</span> (2d ed.). Vol. 1: Plato to Luther; vol. 2: Courtly and romantic; vol. 3: The modern world. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Singer, J. L. 1966. <span class="italic">Daydreaming: An introduction to the experimental study of inner experiences</span>. New York: Random House.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1973. <span class="italic">The child’s world of make-believe</span>. New York: Academic Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1981. <span class="italic">Daydreaming and fantasy</span>. Oxford: Oxford University Press.</p>
<a id="page300" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Singer, J. L., &amp; Switzer, E. 1980. <span class="italic">Mind play: The creative uses of fantasy</span>. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Smith, K. R. 1969. <span class="italic">Behavior and conscious experience: A conceptual analysis</span>. Athens: Ohio University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Solzhenitsyn, A. 1976. <span class="italic">The gulag archipelago</span>. New York: Harper &amp; Row.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Sorokin, P. 1950. <span class="italic">Explorations in altruistic love and behavior, a symposium</span>. Boston: Beacon Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1956. <span class="italic">Fads and foibles in modern sociology</span>. Chicago: Regnery.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1962. <span class="italic">Social and cultural dynamics</span>. New York: Bedminster.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1967. <span class="italic">The ways and power of love</span>. Chicago: Regnery.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Spence, J. D. 1984. <span class="italic">The memory palace of Matteo Ricci</span>. New York: Viking Penguin.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Spinoza, B. de. 1675 (1981). <span class="italic">Ethics</span>. Trans. G. Eliot. Wolfeboro, N.H.: Longwood Publishing Group.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Spiro, M. E. 1987. <span class="italic">Culture and human nature: Theoretical papers of Melford E. Spiro</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Steiner, G. 1974. <span class="italic">Fields of force</span>. New York: Viking.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1978 (1987). <span class="italic">Martin Heidegger</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Sternberg, R. J. 1988. <span class="italic">The triangle of love: Intimacy, passion, commitment</span>. New York: Basic Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Stewart, K. 1972. Dream exploration among the Sinoi. In T. Roszak, ed., <span class="italic">Sources</span>. New York: Harper &amp; Row.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Strack, F., Argyle, M., &amp; Schwarz, N., eds. 1990. <span class="italic">The social psychology of subjective well-being</span>. New York: Pergamon.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Sullivan, H. S. 1953. <span class="italic">The interpersonal theory of psychiatry</span>. New York: Norton.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Sun, W. 1987. <span class="italic">Flow and Yu: Comparison of Csikszentmihalyi’s theory and Chuangtzu’s philosophy</span>. Paper presented at the meetings of the Anthropological Association for the Study of Play, Montreal, March.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Suppies, P. 1978. <span class="italic">The impact of research on education</span>. Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Education.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Suttles, G. 1972. <span class="italic">The social construction of communities</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Szalai, A., ed. 1965. <span class="italic">The use of time: Daily activities of urban and suburban populations in twelve counties</span>. Paris: Mouton.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Teilhard de Chardin, P. 1965. <span class="italic">The phenomenon of man</span>. New York: Harper &amp; Row.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Tessman, J. 1978. <span class="italic">Children of parting parents</span>. New York: Aronson.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Thompson, E. P. 1963. <span class="italic">The making of the English working class</span>. New York: Viking.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Tillich, P. 1952. <span class="italic">The courage to be</span>. New Haven: Yale University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Tolstoy, L. 1886 (1985). <span class="italic">The death of Ivan Ilych</span>. Ed. M. Beresford. Oxford and New York: Basil Blackwell.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Tomkins, S. S. 1962. <span class="italic">Affect, imagery and consciousness</span>. Vol. 1: <span class="italic">The positive affects</span>. New York: Springer Verlag.</p>
<a id="page301" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Toscano, M. 1986. Scuola e vita quotidiana: Un caso di selezione culturale. In F. Massimini &amp; P. Inghilleri, eds., <span class="italic">L’esperienza quotidiana</span> (pp. 305–18). Milan: Franco Angeli.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Tough, A. 1978. <span class="italic">Adults’ learning prospects: A fresh approach to theory and practice in adult learning</span>. Toronto: Ontario Institute for Studies in Education.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Toynbee, A. J. 1934. <span class="italic">A study of history</span>. London: Oxford University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Treisman, A. M., &amp; Gelade, G. 1980. A feature integration theory of attention. <span class="italic">Cognitive Psychology</span> 12:97–136.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Treisman, A. M., &amp; Schmidt, H. 1982. Illusory conjunctions in the perception of objects. <span class="italic">Cognitive Psychology</span> 14:107–41.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Trivers, R. L. 1972. Parental investment and sexual selection. In B. H. Campbell, ed., <span class="italic">Sexual selection and the descent of man, 1871–1971</span> (pp. 136–79). Chicago: Aldine.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Tucker, R. C. 1972. <span class="italic">Philosophy and myth in Karl Marx</span>. 2d ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Turnbull, C. M. 1961. <span class="italic">The forest people</span>. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1972. <span class="italic">The mountain people</span>. New York: Simon &amp; Shuster.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Turner, V. 1969. <span class="italic">The ritual process</span>. New York: Aldine.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1974. Liminal to liminoid in play, flow, and ritual: An essay in comparative symbology. <span class="italic">Rice University Studies</span> 60(3):53–92.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry"><span class="italic">USA Today</span>. 1987. An interview with Susumu Tonegawa. Oct. 13, p. 2A.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">U.S. Dept. of Commerce. 1980. <span class="italic">Social indicators, III</span>. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of the Census.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">U.S. Dept. of Commerce. 1985. <span class="italic">Statistical abstracts of the U.S.</span>, 1986. 106th ed. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of the Census.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">U.S. Dept. of Health &amp; Human Services. 1988. <span class="italic">Vital statistics of the United States, 1985, II</span>. Hyattsville, Md.: U.S. Dept. of Health.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">U.S. Dept. of Justice. 1987. <span class="italic">Uniform Crime Reports</span> 7:25. Washington, D.C.: Dept. of Justice.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Vaillant, G. E. 1977. <span class="italic">Adaptation to life</span>. Boston: Little, Brown.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Vasari, G. 1550 (1959). <span class="italic">Lives of the most eminent painters, sculptors, and architects</span>. New York: Random House.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Veenhoven, R. 1984. <span class="italic">Databook of happiness</span>. Boston: Dordrecht-Reidel.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Veroff, J., Douvan, E., &amp; Kulka, R. A. 1981. <span class="italic">The inner American</span>. New York: Basic Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Veyne, P., ed. 1987. <span class="italic">From pagan Rome to Byzantium</span>. Vol. 1 of <span class="italic">A history of private life</span>, P. Aries and G. Duby, gen. eds. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">von Bertalanffy, L. 1960. <span class="italic">Problems of life</span>. New York: Harper &amp; Row.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1968. <span class="italic">General system theory: Foundations, development, applications</span>. New York: G. Braziller.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">von Uexkull, J. 1921. <span class="italic">Umwelt und Innenwelt der Tiere</span>. 2d ed. Berlin.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1957. <span class="italic">Instinctive behaviour</span>. London: Methuen.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">von Wolff, C. 1724. <span class="italic">Vernunftige Gedanken von dem Krafften des menschlichen Verstandes</span>. Halle im Magdeburg: Rengerische Buchhandl. English trans<a id="page302" class="calibre2"></a>lation (1963) by R. Blackwell, <span class="italic">Preliminary discourse on philosophy in general</span>. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Vygotsky, L. S. 1978. <span class="italic">Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes</span>, M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, &amp; E. Souberman, eds. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Waddington, C. H. 1970. The theory of evolution today. In A. Koestler &amp; J. R. Smythies, eds., <span class="italic">Beyond reductionism</span>. New York: Macmillan.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Waitzkin, F. 1988. <span class="italic">Searching for Bobby Fischer</span>. New York: Random House.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Waley, A. 1939. <span class="italic">Three ways of thought in ancient China</span>. London: G. Allen &amp; Unwin.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Wallis, C., Booth, C., Ludtke, M., &amp; Taylor, E. 1985. Children having children. <span class="italic">Time</span> Dec. 9, pp. 78–90.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Wann, T. W., ed. 1964. <span class="italic">Behaviorism and phenomenology</span>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Warner, R., trans. 1965. <span class="italic">The Persian expedition</span>. Baltimore: Penguin Books.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Watson, B., trans. 1964. <span class="italic">Chuang Tzu, basic writings</span>. New York: Columbia University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Weber, M. 1922. Die protestantische Ethik und der Geist des Kapitalismus. In I. C. B. Mohr, ed., <span class="italic">Gesammelte Aufsatze zur Religions-Sociologie</span>. Vol. 1: <span class="italic">Die Wirtschaftsethik der Weltreligionen</span> (pp. 237–68). Tubingen. English translation (1946) in H. A. Gerth &amp; C. W. Mills, eds., <span class="italic">From Max Weber: Essays in sociology</span> (pp. 267–301). New York: Oxford University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. 1930 (1958). <span class="italic">The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism</span>. London: Allen &amp; Unwin.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Weitzman, M. S. 1978. Finally the family. <span class="italic">Annals of the AAPSS</span> 435:60–82.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Wells, A. 1988. Self-esteem and optimal experience. In M. Csikszentmihalyi &amp; I. S. Csikszentmihalyi, eds., <span class="italic">Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in consciousness</span> (pp. 327–41). New York: Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Werner, H. 1957. <span class="italic">Comparative psychology of mental development</span>. Rev. ed. New York: International Universities Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Werner, H., &amp; Kaplan, B. 1956. The developmental approach to cognition: Its relevance to the psychological interpretation of anthropological and ethnolinguistic data. <span class="italic">American Anthropologist</span> 58:866–80.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Weyden, P. 1984. <span class="italic">Day one</span>. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">White, L. A. 1975. <span class="italic">The concept of cultural systems</span>. New York: Columbia University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">White, R. W. 1959. Motivation reconsidered: The concept of competence. <span class="italic">Psychological Review</span> 66:297–333.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Wicklund, R. A. 1979. The influence of self-awareness on human behavior. <span class="italic">American Scientist</span> 67:182–93.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Wiener, N. 1948 (1961). <span class="italic">Cybernetics, or control and communication in the animal and the machine</span>. Cambridge: MIT Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Williams, R. M., Jr. 1975. Relative deprivation. In L. A. Coser, ed., <span class="italic">The idea of social structure: Papers in honor of Robert K. Merton</span> (pp. 355–78). New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.</p>
<a id="page303" class="calibre2"></a>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Wilson, E. O. 1975. <span class="italic">Sociobiology: The new synthesis</span>. Boston: Belknap Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Wilson, S. R. 1985. Therapeutic processes in a yoga ashram. <span class="italic">American Journal of Psychotherapy</span> 39:253–62.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">——. In press. Personal growth in a yoga ashram: A social psychological analysis. <span class="italic">The social scientific study of religion</span>, vol. 2.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Wittfogel, K. 1957. <span class="italic">Oriental despotism</span>. New Haven: Yale University Press.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Wolfe, T. 1987. <span class="italic">The bonfire of the vanities</span>. New York: Farrar, Straus.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Wood, E. 1954. <span class="italic">Great system of yoga</span>. New York: Philosophical Library.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Wundt, W. 1902. <span class="italic">Grundzuge der physiologischen Psychologie</span>, vol. 3. Leipzig.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Wynne, E. A. 1978. Behind the discipline problem: Youth suicide as a measure of alienation. <span class="italic">Phi Delta Kappan</span> 59:307–15.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Yankelovich, D. 1981. <span class="italic">New rules: Searching for self-fulfillment in a world turned upside down</span>. New York: Random House.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Zigler, E. F., &amp; Child, I. L. 1973. <span class="italic">Socialization and personality development</span>. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.</p>

<p class="bibliographyentry">Zuckerman, M. 1979. <span class="italic">Sensation seeking</span>. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.</p>
</div>
</div>




  </div>

  
  <div class="calibreToc">
    <h2><a href="../../gpg61-vizkw.html"> Table of contents</a></h2>
     <div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a href="text_cover.xhtml">Cover</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="text.xhtml">Title Page</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ded01.xhtml">Dedication</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="con01.xhtml">Contents</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="pre01.xhtml">Preface</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch01.xhtml">Chapter 1</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha01.xhtml">Introduction</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha02.xhtml">Overview</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha03.xhtml">The Roots of Discontent</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha04.xhtml">The Shields of Culture</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha05.xhtml">Reclaiming Experience</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha06.xhtml">Paths of Liberation</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch02.xhtml">Chapter 2</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha07.xhtml">The Limits of Consciousness</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha08.xhtml">Attention as Psychic Energy</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha09.xhtml">Enter the Self</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha10.xhtml">Disorder in Consciousness: Psychic Entropy</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha11.xhtml">Order in Consciousness: Flow</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha12.xhtml">Complexity and the Growth of the Self</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch03.xhtml">Chapter 3</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha13.xhtml">Pleasure and Enjoyment</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha14.xhtml">The Elements of Enjoyment</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha15.xhtml">The Autotelic Experience</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch04.xhtml">Chapter 4</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha16.xhtml">Flow Activities</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha17.xhtml">Flow and Culture</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha18.xhtml">The Autotelic Personality</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha19.xhtml">The People of Flow</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch05.xhtml">Chapter 5</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha20.xhtml">Higher, Faster, Stronger</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha21.xhtml">The Joys of Movement</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha22.xhtml">Sex as Flow</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha23.xhtml">The Ultimate Control: Yoga and the Martial Arts</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha24.xhtml">Flow through the Senses: The Joys of Seeing</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha25.xhtml">The Flow of Music</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha26.xhtml">The Joys of Tasting</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch06.xhtml">Chapter 6</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha27.xhtml">The Mother of Science</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha28.xhtml">The Rules of the Games of the Mind</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha29.xhtml">The Play of Words</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha30.xhtml">Befriending Clio</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha31.xhtml">The Delights of Science</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha32.xhtml">Loving Wisdom</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha33.xhtml">Amateurs and Professionals</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha34.xhtml">The Challenge of Lifelong Learning</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch07.xhtml">Chapter 7</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha35.xhtml">Autotelic Workers</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha36.xhtml">Autotelic Jobs</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha37.xhtml">The Paradox of Work</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha38.xhtml">The Waste of Free Time</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch08.xhtml">Chapter 8</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha39.xhtml">The Conflict between Being Alone and Being with Others</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha40.xhtml">The Pain of Loneliness</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha41.xhtml">Taming Solitude</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha42.xhtml">Flow and the Family</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha43.xhtml">Enjoying Friends</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha44.xhtml">The Wider Community</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch09.xhtml">Chapter 9</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha45.xhtml">Tragedies Transformed</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha46.xhtml">Coping with Stress</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha47.xhtml">The Power of Dissipative Structures</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha48.xhtml">The Autotelic Self: A Summary</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ch10.xhtml">Chapter 10</a>
      <ul>
        <li>
          <a href="cha49.xhtml">What Meaning Means</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha50.xhtml">Cultivating Purpose</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha51.xhtml">Forging Resolve</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha52.xhtml">Recovering Harmony</a>
        </li>
        <li>
          <a href="cha53.xhtml">The Unification of Meaning in Life Themes</a>
        </li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="not01.xhtml">Notes</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="ref01.xhtml">References</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="cop01.xhtml">Copyright</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="atp01.xhtml">About the Publisher</a>
    </li>
  </ul>
</div>


  </div>
  

  <div class="calibreEbNav">
    
      <a href="not01.xhtml" class="calibreAPrev">previous page</a>
    

    <a href="../../gpg61-vizkw.html" class="calibreAHome"> start</a>

    
      <a href="cop01.xhtml" class="calibreANext"> next page</a>
    
  </div>

</div>

</body>
</html>
